Action Task 5-5B

(needs approval)

Introduction:

Welcome back to Learning Lesson Five, Action Task 5-5B.  This is Part Two of this Action Task which again will support your learning the technique of self-portraiture with clients as well as support your own understanding and appreciation for the benefits it can offer both personally and professionally.  

Part Two: 

For part two of Action Task 5-5A I want you to physically take a new and current self-portrait that resembles the visual set-up of the self-portrait that you just finished working with.  I want you to print it out to the same size as the previous self-portrait and then remove the previous self-portrait from your large sheet of paper and replace it with the new one.  

Next, I want you to answer the same series of questions using the new and current self-portrait.   Arrowing out using a different colour marker or pen, write down your answers to the questions that now pertain to the new and current self-portrait.  

Questions:

What stands out the most for you when you look at yourself in this self-portrait? Explain.

What does this self-portrait say about you?

What does this self-portrait not say about you?

What if anything do you like about this self-portrait?  List and explain.

What if anything do you not like about this self-portrait?  List and explain.

What emotions come to mind when you view this self-portrait? List and explain.

If you could talk in this self-portrait what would you be saying?

Is there anything missing from this self-portrait that you wish people could see or feel about you?  List and explain.

Is there something that you wish you could change about this self-portrait?  Explain.

If I asked you to tear up this self-portrait could you do that?  Explain either way.

Once you have finished answering all the questions again using the new and current self-portrait, I want you to review your answers for both self-portraits and note any similarities or differences that you find.  Write those similarities and differences down at the top of your paper, explaining those similarities or differences if necessary.  

Next Steps:

Next, take a photo of your paper again with the new and current self-portrait on it and submit it to me for approval.  If there are any similarities or differences that I feel need further exploring, I will let you know.  If not, then I will give you the green light to move onto Learning Lesson Six where I will meet you next.