Introduction:

I have to say that I absolutely love PhotoTherapy Technique #9, Photo Manipulation.  It’s a technique that could be describe as one that has a mind of its own.   Given its adaptability and numerous applications, there are countless ways of using and applying Photo Manipulation to client’s everyday concerns.  

Main Teaching Points and Support Point:

Because Photo Manipulation involves the altering or transforming of an image or photograph, it means that you are free to interpret that any creative way you like.  Perhaps it’s using paints and markers to deface, change, recreate or embellish an image.  Or maybe it involves using scissors and glue to cut, paste, collage, and transform an image into something entirely new.   Or it could even mean taking an existing image and extending it out through drawing.  Regardless of the way that you choose to use Photo Manipulation, its benefits will always serve the client.   

Photo Manipulation is a fantastic technique to use in support of helping clients see how things can be different.  Essentially you are giving your client the chance to create a different outcome, and perhaps even a desired one.  It’s one thing to talk with a client about how things in their life can be different, but its another to provide them with the opportunity to visually create and experience that change.  When a client can see how things can be different, they are more apt to believe it’s possible.    

Review and Outcome:

Again, Photo Manipulation is a PhotoTherapy technique that will serve to support all your clients needs.  Whether they are working through relationship troubles, works troubles, personal troubles, or alternate troubles, Photo Manipulation will give your client the freedom to manipulate those troubles and turn them into something new.  In order for a client to creatively construct a change, they had to first visualize it.  When we practice regular visualization it not only helps focus our minds on what we want, but it helps bring us that much closer to attaining it. 

Next Steps:

Like many of the PhotoTherapy techniques we have talked about, the best way for you to understand Photo Manipulation is to experience it.   I’ll meet you in Action Task 5-6.  