Introduction:

Welcome back to Module 5, Learning Lesson Seven.  This is the module where we will be tying everything together and looking at how you can use the information you have learned thus far to best support your clients.

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

So up to this point you have learned a lot about PhotoTherapy in terms of what it looks like, the techniques that apply to it, and how to implement those techniques in your sessions with clients.  What we are going to talk about in this Learning Lesson is what to do with all that information now!  In other words, how can you take all this information and all that you have learned and use it in such a way that best supports your clients.

Well, that’s a great question.  How can you take all that you have learned up to this point and use it so that it does support your clients the way they need to be supported?  The answer to this question lies with you.  Since I don’t know who your clients are or what their history or concerns are, then that makes you the expert here in figuring out how to apply all that you have learned with the clients you currently see.  

This brings us to the Action Task part of this Learning Lesson.  An Action Task that will require some thinking on your part and some careful consideration around the technique that you choose and the client with whom you choose to use it.  

Review and Outcome:

I have previously talked in length about how to use PhotoTherapy and its specific techniques in general.  But what I haven’t talked about is how you can best use this information to support your own clients.  The reason I haven’t talked about this already is because it’s not something I can necessarily talk about as much as it is something that you must experience for yourself.   

So, this is where you get the opportunity to put all that you have learned thus far into practice with one of your own clients.   An opportunity that let’s you be the one to choose the client (preferably one that you are having difficulty with), choose the technique, and choose how you are going to use that technique to best support that client’s concern(s).   In other words, you are going create and formulate a mock-up PhotoTherapy session based upon one of your real clients concerns.   Why am I asking you to do this?  Well, this is one of the best ways that I know of for you to get your feet wet before actually taking the plunge.  

Next Steps:

So, give this some thought and when you’re ready, I’ll meet you in Action Task 5-7.  