(PDF Provided)

Introduction:

As was previously talked about in Module 2, Learning Lesson 4, the use of family albums and photographs with clients is considered a technique of its own.  And because of the personal nature and content of the images themselves, care should be taken when applying them in treatment with clients.  

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

As you’ve learned, family photographs can be vessels for many things, least of which are a client’s position, placement, and/or treatment within the family unit.  Any one of these aspects could trigger a client, causing them to withdraw, closedown, or even lose control.   These reactions are a valuable part of the therapeutic process; however, it is important to determine when family albums and photographs would be most effective or more effective to the client.   Keeping in mind that family albums and photographs are usually made or used as a means of recording time and/or its passing.  Because of this, they can also serve as a painful reminder for loss or a lack of growth.  While some of us are grateful for the photographs we have of those who have passed as they provide us with comfort, there are others who find family photographs anything but comforting.  Individuals who have experienced trauma or abuse at the hands of a family member may not be ready or capable of working with family photographs as they serve as a painful reminder of the experience or the event itself.  Using them could cause further trauma or regression.  Therefore, their use in treatment should always serve to benefit the client’s growth and healing.   

Family photographs contain an endless amount of information, all of which can bring about a necessary awareness and understanding for self.  Reviewing family albums and photographs can bring about questions related to connection, placement, closeness, emotional contact, personal roles, family bonds and family patterns.  I have often found that the conversations that stem from or come about as a result of working with family photographs can be instrumental in the client’s own growth and healing.  

Therefore, when used appropriately, family albums and photographs can bring about the necessary awareness and understanding for self that a client is often in need of.   Because of this, and because of the care that should be taken when using family albums and photographs, the process itself or a typical PhotoTherapy session involving family albums and photographs will look somewhat different.   

The Use of Family Albums and Photographs in a Typical Session

When you feel the use of family albums or photographs would be beneficial to your client, this is when you would suggest that the client bring a selection of images with them to their next session.  If they do not want to do this, then the timing for using family albums and photographs is not right.  If they agree then the initially selection of images brought to the session should be the client’s choice as generally speaking these will be the images that the client needs to work with most.  You may however make requests for specific images (i.e., photographs of parents, siblings, grandparents, etc.) thereafter if you feel those specific images would support the work that you and your client are currently doing.   

Step One:  Identify Your Current Mood or Train of Thought

This step will remain the same regardless of the techniques used in a typical PhotoTherapy session.   Client’s should always be instructed to take a few moments to close their eyes and get in touch with their current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state prior to working with any imagery.   However, once that mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state has been established, have the client verbalize it or write it down, after which they can freely choose an image to work with.  

Step Two:View the Photograph

The photograph or photographs used in a typical PhotoTherapy session centred around family should be photographs or images that the client brings themselves, and images that pertain to the client’s own or extended family.  You can however provide generic family photographs to work with or use in contrast to or along side the family photographs that the client brings.  These generic family photographs can be useful in providing comparisons, support, or initiating new concepts and/or trains of thought.  Ideally, these generic family photographs would be used in conjunction with the client’s own photographs as opposed to standing on their own.  However, in some cases where a client may not have access to family albums or photographs, generic family images can serve as a replacement or stand in for purposes of this technique and activity. 

In this step, the client is free to choose any one of the family photographs they were asked to bring with them.  Once they have made their selection, have the client sit with that photograph or image for a few moments before you begin.  This will give the client time to connect or reconnect with the photograph or image prior to working with it.  This is an important step in the process and one that shouldn’t be skipped as the client’s initial selection of this image would have been based on a prior mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state.  When working with family albums and photographs you want your client to be prepared to do so.  

Step Three:Answer the Following Questions

Here are some suggested questions that you can pose to your client when working with family albums or photographs.  Questions that will promote conversation and discussion around their own family dynamics and the strengths or weaknesses they feel may have contributed to their current concerns.   

What made you choose this family photograph?

What do you know if anything about this photograph?

Is there a story behind it? If so, what is that story?

What stands out the most for you in this photograph?  Explain.

What do you notice about the placement, emotional intimacy, or distancing of family members or individuals within the photograph? 

If you could change the placement of any of the family members or individuals within the photograph who and what would you change?  Explain.

Do you feel the photograph is missing something or someone?  If so whom or what?

What is the overall feeling you get from this photograph?

If you are not in this photograph, but would like to be, where would you place yourself?

If you are in this photograph, but wish you weren’t, why would that be?

If you were to give this photograph a title what would that title be? 

These questions will provide a great deal of information that can support the work you do with your clients so that you can serve them best.  Information that will provide new avenues for discussion and open up other areas of concern that perhaps your client was not aware of.  Avenues that need to be addressed in order for the concern to be resolved.

Step Four:Replace the Photograph  

This step is one that will be left to your discretion.  If you feel the client is ready to take the process to the next level and do some comparative, supportive, or conceptual thinking, then this would be the time to introduce or replace their family photograph with a generic family image for them to work with.  

The benefit to doing this is that you provide your client with an opportunity to see family units differently.  To visually experience them differently and thus view them differently.  It’s easy to get stuck behind the visual of how we were raised or how our families conducted themselves and think that there is only one way.  And while there are families who did these things well, there are other families who perhaps didn’t do them so well.  So, by offering your client the opportunity to see how other families interact, you’re also offering them the opportunity to expand on their own ideas of family by noticing differences that could in fact help them through their own family difficulties.   

Replacing the photograph is also an excellent way of introducing reflection and appreciation.  Perhaps your client is solely focused on the negative aspects of their homelife or childhood and in need of perspective or reassurance.  By replacing the photograph with a generic family image, you can offer your client the opportunity to see their homelife or childhood differently.  When we can see things such as these differently or view them from a different perspective, they tend to lose their negative impact.  And when they lose their negative impact, they no longer have the hold on us they once had.  A hold that perhaps is getting in the way of your client living their best life.  

Step Five:Tying It All Together

Once again, this step is your opportunity to ask your client to point out any similarities or differences that they notice between the two photographs.  Similarities or difference that may or may not have had an affect on their idea of family.  These similarities and/or differences will support the direction you will take next.  So, by paying careful attention to your client’s emotional and physical responses (body language, energy level, facial expressions) to each of the photographs, you will get a sense of whether or not the use of generic family photographs has supported their concerns around family and what that looks and feels like for them.  

Review and Outcome:

So, when working with family albums and photographs, be sure to make your client the largest part of the process.   It will be their findings and observations from their own family photographs and generic ones that will speak volumes about how they see and experience family in general.   Findings and observations that will become valuable tools for you to use in support of their recovery. 

Next Steps:

I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson Five where you will be learning how to use self-portraiture with clients.