(PDF Provided)

Introduction:

Welcome to Module Five where we will be putting what we have learned thus far into practice.   All 9 PhotoTherapy Techniques will be addressed in this Module in one way or another, and in one form or another.  

First up is learning how to use photographs during a session with clients.  This Learning Lesson applies to Techniques # 1(Photographs Taken by the Mental Health Professional), #2 (Photographs Taken by the Client), and #8 (Photographs from External Sources).

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

So far, we have talked about what PhotoTherapy is and the benefits of using it on ourselves and with clients.  But we haven’t yet talked about what that actually looks like in terms of using it with a client.  

I did walk you through what a typical PhotoTherapy session would look like in Module 3 Learning Lesson 10, whereby a client would enter into the office, be greeted, choose an image from a selection of images that would be laid out and visible, explain their choice, and then answer some personalized questions.  But we need to take this a step further so that you know what to do next.   

I had also mentioned in that same Learning Lesson that from week to week, despite having a goal or focal concern, the sessions should always take place in the present.  In other words, be focused on what the client is experiencing in the moment as this will support the client’s ability to stay current and avoid approaching things from a position of the past.   This is the reason I ask my clients to choose an image that resonates with them in that particular moment.  But again, what does this actually look like.  

Well, this is where it gets a little more difficult to explain verbally rather then visually.   So, what I want you to do now is have a look at the photograph I have attached below.   I want you to walk through the same steps that a client would typically be taking when they begin a session.  I want you to pretend that the image below is the one that you chose and answer the same series of questions that I would put forth to a client.  I want you to write down your answers and use those answers as your gateway to what should happen next.  Let’s take it step by step shall we.

Walking Your Talk Through the Use of Photographs in a Typical Session

Step One:  Identify Your Current Mood or Train of Thought

Take a few moments to close your eyes and get in touch with your current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state.   Once it’s clear in your mind, write it down.

Step Two:View the Photograph

Take some time to view the photograph below, taking into consideration all that is contained within its frame.  Remember this photograph is one that you hypothetically chose upon entering your session.

Step Three:Answer the Following Questions

What do you think the photograph is about?

What do you notice or see in the photograph that supports how you are feeling?

Is there anything about the photograph you can identify with or relate to personally?

What if anything would you add to this photograph?

What if anything would you take away or remove from the photograph?

If you had to give the photograph a title what would you call it?

How does the photograph make you feel?  

Step Four:Answer These Additional Questions

With your answers in mind, I want you to go back to the current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state you wrote down at the beginning and ask yourself these furthered questions. 

How does my current mood, train of thought or concern affect how I see this photograph?  Explain.

If my current mood, train of thought, or concern had been different, would my answers also have been different?  If so how.  Explain in as much detail as possible.

If you were able to relate to or identify with something in this photograph, why do you think that was?

If you chose to add or remove something from the photograph, why did you choose what you did?  Do you think your current mood, train of thought or concern had anything to do with choices?

If your mood, train of thought or concern was different, do you think the title you gave to the photograph would be different too?  If so, what do you think it might be?

Now that you have looked at the photograph from a questioning place, has this had an affect on your mood, train of thought, concern, or overall feeling?

Step Five:Replace the Photograph

Now I want you to put this photograph aside and replace it with this new one.  In a typical session, you would replace the first image that your client chose with one that you thought sufficiently matched the theme or topic of theirs, but from a different perspective.  

When you can provide your client with two different perspectives, you are not only giving them a chance to notice their own similarities and differences, but you are also giving yourself more information pertaining to the theme or topic that the client themselves chose to work with.  There is always a reason for a client’s image chose and it’s your job to figure out what that reason is and then work with it.  

Step Six:Do Your Answers Fit?

Apply your answers from Step Three to this new photograph.  

Do any of your answers fit with this new photograph?  Explain why or why not.

What if anything would you add or remove from this new photograph?  Explain.

Does this photograph make you feel the same way?  If so why and if not, why?

What title would you give to this new photograph?

What overall feeling are you left with after viewing this photograph?

Step Seven:Tying It All Together

Step seven is your opportunity to ask your client to point out any similarities or differences that they notice between the two photographs.  Similarities or difference that may or may not have had an affect on their current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state.  These similarities and/or differences will support the direction you will take next.  So, by paying careful attention to your client’s (or yours in the case of this example) answers and physical responses (body language, energy level, facial expressions) to each of the photographs, you will get a sense of whether the theme of the images should be further pursued or whether or not there is a specific element within the photographs themselves that needs further exploring (remember, if this was a typical session with a client, then they would have chosen the first image to begin with).  Perhaps their idea of family needs further exploring, or their placement within the family, or family in general if they were negatively affected by both images.   You will get a sense from their answers and their body language what in fact needs further exploring.    

Review and Outcome: 

All in all, each answer will provide you with information about the client, about their thought process, what they deem important or not important (what they have noticed within the photographs vs what they didn’t notice), what they can relate to, and whether or not their mood or focus is shiftable.  This is your opportunity to point out or take notice of your client’s own differences.  Differences in mood, train of thought, concern, body language, energy level, focus, responses etc. as a result of looking one image over another.  This is also your opportunity to bring it all together and use the information you have at hand to determine your next course of action as it pertains to each individual client.  

Understanding how photographs can and do work in therapy is crucial to how affective they are and can be with clients.  Understanding the impact one image can have versus another, despite being of similar theme or topic, is important when bringing it all together.   Knowing that a client’s mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state can affect how they see what they are looking at, or experiencing, can help support their progress and the PhotoTherapy process itself.  

It important to be mindful of how images and photographs works in therapy and how they don’t.  In other words, how they can positively or negatively affect you clients.   

Next Steps:      

Next up is learning how to use movies and film with clients.   I’ll meet you in the next Learning Lesson.