(PDF Provided)

Introduction:

Welcome to Learning Lesson Two where we will be putting what you have learned into practice once again.  Only this time the focus is on how to use movies and film during a session with clients.   This Learning Lesson applies to Technique #7 (Movies, Films, TV Commercials, Documentaries and Video Games). 

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

Like using photographs with clients, movies and film also provide valuable information from which you can work with and from.  

As we previously learned in Module 3 Learning Lesson Eight, movies and film are simply a series of images or pictures (still photographs) that have been seamlessly woven together to create a message or a story.  We also learned that the story or message(s) contained within the movie or film is what will serve as the therapeutic element within the session, however it will be the scenes themselves that will serve as the individual opportunities for growth.  And the connection or connections made while watching the movie or film will provide you with the valuable information from which you can work with and from that I am referring to.  

Valuable information like where the client is at in his or her life, what they are most focused on and why, and whether or not they live by reality or fantasy.   Connections like these are what will lead you to the learning opportunities as they will tell you so much about your client in terms of what they feel is good, missing, or not working well in their lives.  Learning opportunities, similar to those found in a photograph, in that they too bring about awareness and understanding for expectations and/or a client’s need for them.  

The difference in learning opportunities between the two visual mediums, photographs, and film, may seem insignificant as both convey emotions, thoughts, ideas, memories, and messages, as well as express moods, tell stories, capture, and freeze moments in time, document changes in people and our world, and depict growth.   However, because movies and film take more time to tell the story and convey the message(s), these opportunities for awareness, introspection, curiosity, and problem solving are greater and more plentiful.   

When working with movies and film with clients, I generally do so after we have had several sessions together so that I have a better understanding for the client’s concerns as well as a feel for their reactions.   Using movies and film can be a bit overwhelming for some client’s as they can present more than one area of concern or focus.   Thus, the reason I like to wait until after several sessions with a client before I introduce this technique or form of phototherapy.  

Viewing photographs can be done during the session, however when working with movies or film it is best to have the client view the movie or film prior to the session beginning especially if you want them to view it in its entirety.  If you are only focusing on a particular part, scene, or section, then it is possible and encouraged to do so during the session so that you can be privy to their emotional and physical reactions.   

So, as we did with the previous Learning Lesson, let’s take this process step by step.

Walking Your Talk Through the Use of Movies and Film in a Typical Session

I want you to choose a movie that you yourself would like to work with.  I typically ask a client to choose a movie that they have watched more than once as it’s an indicator that the movie still contains value and/or learning opportunities.  

Step One:  Identify Your Current Mood or Train of Thought

As we did with the photograph in the previous Learning Lesson, I want you to take a few moments to close your eyes and get in touch with your current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state prior to watching the movie or film you’ve chosen.   Again, write it down (or when working with client’s have them verbalize it to you) as this will be what you gauge your (or your client’s) answers, reactions, and overall outcome on.   

Step Two:View the Movie or Film

Next, I want you to watch the movie in its entirety making note of any and all scenes or particular parts within the movie or film that move you (or when working with client’s, move them).   And by move you I mean parts or scenes within the movie or film that move you to tears, laughter, anger, frustrations, rage, or any other emotional state.   

Step Three:Answer These Questions

Similar to Learning Lesson One, ask yourself (or your client) these suggested questions upon finishing the movie or film:

What do you think the movie or film was about?

Was there anything in the movie or film that supported how you are currently feeling?

Was there anything within the movie or film that you could identify with or relate to personally?

Is there a scene that wasn’t in the movie or film that you feel should have been included or added? If so what scene and explain why.

Is there a scene within the movie or film that you feel you would like to remove? If so what and explain why.

If you had to give the movie or film a new title what would that be?

How did the movie or film make you feel overall?  

Step Four:Answer These Additional Questions

With your answers in mind, I want you to go back to the current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state you wrote down prior to watching the movie or film and ask yourself (or your client) these furthered suggested questions. 

How did my current mood, train of thought, concern or emotional state affect how much I enjoyed this movie or film?  Explain.

If my current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state prior to watching the movie or film had been different, would my answers also have been different?  If so how.  Explain in as much detail as possible.

If you were able to relate to or identify with something in this movie or film, why do you think that was?

If you chose to add or remove something from the movie or film, why do you think you choose what you did?  Do you think your current mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state had anything to do with your choices?

If your mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state had been different, do you think the title you gave to the movie or film would also be different?  If so, what do you think it might be?

Now that you have looked at the movie or film from a questioning place, has this had an affect on your mood, train of thought, concern, or overall feeling?

Step Five:Tying It All Together

As we did in Learning Lesson One while using photographs, pay careful attention to your client’s (or yours in the case of this example) answers and physical responses (body language, energy level, facial expressions) to each of the questions, as they will help you get a sense of whether the theme of the movie or film should be further pursued or whether or not there is a specific element within the movie or film itself that needs further exploring (remember, if this was a typical session with a client, then they would have chosen the movie or film to begin with).  You will get a sense from their answers and their body language upon asking the questions, what in fact needs further exploring.    

Review and Outcome: 

Again, each answer will provide you with information about the client, about their thought process, what they deem important or not important (what they noticed within the movie or film vs what they didn’t notice), what they can relate to, and whether or not their mood or focus is shiftable.  This is your opportunity to point out or take notice of your client’s own differences.  Differences in mood, train of thought, concern, body language, energy level, focus, responses etc. as a result of having watched the movie or film, or part of.  This is also your opportunity to bring it all together and use the information you have at hand to determine your next course of action as it pertains to each individual client.  

Understanding how movies and film can and do work in therapy is crucial to how effective they are and can be with clients.  Understanding the impact one movie or film has over another, despite being of a similar theme or topic, is important when bringing it all together.   And again, knowing that a client’s mood, train of thought, concern, or emotional state can affect how they see what they are looking at, or experiencing, can help support their progress and the PhotoTherapy process itself.  

Next Steps:      

Next up is learning how to use projected imagery with clients.   I’ll meet you in the next Learning Lesson.