Action Task 5-7

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval)

Introduction:

Welcome to Action Task 5-7.  In this Action Task you will get the opportunity to applying all that you have learned thus far to a real-life situation.  You will be taking what you have learned and using it to formulate a mock-up PhotoTherapy session that will be based upon one of your current client’s concerns.   

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

If you refer back to Module 3, Learning Lesson 10, I described or outlined for you what a typical PhotoTherapy session might look like.  I described the session from the client’s point of entry to their completion of the opening PhotoTherapy activity.  I spoke about the importance of paying attention at this point to your client’s physical and emotional state, and how to use this information to determine how you will proceed.  I talked a bit about different therapeutic approaches and how they will alter your use of PhotoTherapy and its techniques.  I explained how important it is to pay attention to your client’s responses as their responses will determine the direction the session should take and the techniques and how you will use them.  Now it’s your turn.  Now I want you to take all that information and put it to good use to formulate a PhotoTherapy session for me.   

This is where you get the opportunity to put all that you have learned thus far into practice with one of your own clients.   An opportunity that will let you be the one to choose the client (preferably one that you are having difficulty with), choose the technique, and choose how you are going to use that technique to best support one of their concerns.   I want you to choose a client you are currently seeing and apply one of the eight PhotoTherapy techniques that we have talked about to a concern that they are currently trying to overcome or heal from.   In other words, you are going to create and formulate a mock-up PhotoTherapy session using one of the eight PhotoTherapy techniques that we have talked about and apply that technique to one of your current client’s concerns.  Why am I asking you to do this?  Well, this is one of the best ways that I know of for you to get your feet wet before actually taking the plunge.  

Review and Outcome:

So once again, I want you to choose a client, choose a concern, and choose a PhotoTherapy technique, and formulate a plan for how you will use that technique with that client.  Then I want you to sit down and create a mock-up session in written format describing each step of the session (from point of entry to your goodbyes) as well as the application and use of the PhotoTherapy technique that you have chosen.   Be as detailed as possible so that I can get a clear picture of how you are using PhotoTherapy and the PhotoTherapy technique you have chosen.  Once you are finished your formulated mock-up session, I want you to send it to me for approval. 

Next Steps:

Once you have sent me your formulated mock-up session, I will review it and provide you with some feedback.   At this point I will meet you in Module Six!