Action Task 6-1 – Tell Me the Story

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval)

Introduction:

Welcome to Action Task 6-1 where you get the chance to experience storytelling firsthand. 

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

As explained in Learning Lesson One, storytelling is an integral part of PhotoTherapy and the use of photographs with clients.  It is an essential part of a client’s growth and healing because it supports their need to share their story and then learn from it.  

As I pointed out earlier, storytelling is one of the greatest avenues for discovery that you have at your disposal when using PhotoTherapy and photographs with clients.  Because of the very nature of the medium that you are using, imagery and photographs, you’ll have all the pieces anyone could ever want or need to make a story.  Pieces of their personal puzzle that can be fit together to create a story that reflects their current situation or internal thoughts.  

So, for this Action Task I want you to tell me a story.  A story that will be based on the photograph attached below, and one that has a beginning, middle, and end.  A story that will fill in the missing blank pieces of the visual story that the photograph itself has started.  This story will be a written translation of what you see happening visually.  

Your story should reflect your perception of what you think is happening within the photograph.  In other words, write the story you feel is behind the image as you see it.   Write what you feel visually led up to that photograph, what’s happening within it, and the visual chapters that came thereafter.  Essentially you will be writing and submitting a short story about the photograph below that will be told through your eyes and from your thoughts. 

Review and Outcome:

Again, I want you to have a good look at the photograph above and when you’re ready, I want you to create a story that stems from your visual reaction to the photograph.  What you take in from the photograph could be your beginning, middle, or end, but whichever one it is, I want you to create the remaining parts of the story such that you now have a completed written story from beginning to end.  

Next Steps:

Once you have your story completed, I want you to send it to me for feedback and approval at which point I will give you the green light to move on to Learning Lesson Two of this Module.   