Action Task 6-3:  What Does the Story Say About Me?

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval) 

Introduction:

As we spoke about in Learning Lesson Three, stories talk to us as we read them.  They let us know what’s happening line by line, paragraph by paragraph, and page by page.  We can see the words, but we must create the images for ourselves.  Our visual memory banks play an instrumental role in helping piece the story together, drawing upon our experiences and fill in the pictures for us.

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

For this activity, I want you to think about the stories you just finished writing.  I want you to think about the process and what that was like for you.  Did the words come naturally, or did you have to rely on your visual memory bank to help formulate and piece those stories together?

I want you to read your stories and then reread them again.  Then what I would like you to do is answer the following set of questions for each of the stories you wrote.  I want you to think about the questions before you answer them, giving yourself some time to recognize the parts of yourself that may be hidden or buried within your stories and not out in the open.  Parts of yourself that perhaps even you forgot about until now.  

Once you have read and reread both of your stories, I want you to apply the following set of questions to each one, writing down your answers in as much detail as possible.

What feeling would you attach to your story?  Explain.

Do you like your story?  If so why and if not, why?  Explain.

What part of your story do you like the most?  Explain.

What part of your story do you dislike the most?  Explain.

If you had to describe one of your characters in greater detail, what would he or she look like? 

If you could be a character within your story, which character would you be?

If you were to replace one of the characters in your story with a family member, who would that family member be and what part would they play in your story?  Explain.

Have you ever experienced a similar chain of events as those within your story?  Explain.

If you could rewrite your story again, what part or parts of your story would you change?  Explain in detail.

If you were to apply those changes to your story what feeling would you attach to it now? Explain.

What feeling would you attach to your life thus far?  Explain.

If your life were a book what would that book be called?  Explain.

What did you learn about yourself from this activity?  Explain.

Next Steps:

Once you have finished answering all the questions above for both stories, I want you to submit your response to question 13 to me for approval at which point I will give you the green light to move onto Learning Lesson Four.