Introduction:

So many of the things we struggle with in life are universal, yet so many of these same things people struggle with are dealt with in silence.  Why is that?  Well often we are of the belief that these issues are somehow unique to ourselves.  And because of that many of these common struggles are at the root of what makes us feel anxious, depressed, and insecure.

These are some of the most common difficulties or struggles that I have come across with clients.   I am sharing these only because they are common and not because they are the only difficulties or struggles that I deal with.  I believe it’s important as mental health practitioners, to be aware of the commonalities so that we can support our client’s in knowing that the are not only in their difficulties and struggles, but rather together in them.  

Anxiety

Fear

Relationship Issues

Grief

Comparing Ourselves to Others

Work/Life Balance

Negative Self-Talk

Existential Struggles

Political Woes

Sexual Assault

Addictions

Distorted Thinking

Social Anxiety

Intrusive Thoughts

Desire for Control

It’s important for you to become familiar with these reoccurring themes so that when you are presented with them you will know how best to work with them.  Therefore, I would highly recommend and encourage you to do some research of your own on each and everyone of these reoccurring themes.  Get familiar with what they look like, what they sound like, how they behave, their body language, and especially their disguises.   This can only serve to benefit you as a mental health practitioner and listener.

Review and Outcome: 

I listed quite a few reoccurring themes above, however I think the most common of these that I have encountered thus far would be negative self-talk and the need to compare ourselves to others.  I don’t know that I have ever come across anyone who has not experienced one or the other at some point in their life.  That point where insecurity raised its ugly head and made you feel less than because you chose to see someone else as more than.   Or when the volume of that inner voice was so loud that the only way to shut it off was to give into what it was saying.   Comparing ourselves to others and putting ourselves down only serves to acknowledge our short comings rather then honour our successes and achievements.   

As a mental health practitioner, and a Photo Therapy Practitioner, it’s extremely important to be aware of the reoccurring themes that you will come across when working with clients.  Knowing what to look for and being able to appreciate and understand the concern itself will support both you and your client through the therapeutic process.  

As you begin your practice of PhotoTherapy, take some time to educated yourself on these themes and to think about how you can best utilize the PhotoTherapy techniques and tools you’ve learned to best support you and your client in these situations.  Granted, no two situations are alike, however when you come at them from a place of knowledge and understanding, you are much better equipped to deal with them.  

Next Steps:

I’ll meet you in Module Seven.