Introduction:

Over the past few weeks, we have covered a lot of different aspects and applications of PhotoTherapy.  So many that it may be hard for you to decide which aspect or application will bring about the best results or is the most important.   And that’s what we are going to talk about here in this Learning Lesson.

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

The question of which PhotoTherapy technique to use and when has often come up for me in conversation with other mental health practitioners.  And my answer is always the same.  When you’re working with clients and using PhotoTherapy, it’s not your job to know which aspect or application will work best, it’s the client’s!  And I know in previous Learning Lessons I stressed the importance of knowing when to use and apply certain PhotoTherapy techniques, and I still stand by this.  However, that’s not what I am referring to here.  What I am referring to is the importance of listening to your client.  Of being the listener rather than the talker.  

When we take the time to really listen, without preconceived thought or judgement or solutions, we get the answers we need from our clients.  Our clients know themselves better then anyone else even if they don’t see it that way.  Your job is not to tell them what you see, but to help them see it for themselves.  And in doing so they will give you all the answers you need to know which aspect, which technique, or which direction to go in.   

Your clients know what’s wrong in and with their lives.  They may not be able to put it into words or label it, but they know what feels good and what doesn’t.  They know what’s working and what isn’t.  And because of this they are your best source of information for how and when to move forward.   

Review and Outcome:    

So, what is the best or most important aspect or application of PhotoTherapy?  Listening.  Letting your clients tell you their story, in their way, with their details, explanations and understandings.  Let them share with you what they know to be true, and then together you can work on piecing together a new story, one that has a healthier ending.  

Next Steps:  

Thanks for listening!  I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson Five. 