Action Task 6-2 – Retell Me the Story

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval) 

Introduction:

Welcome to Learning Lesson Two, Action Task 6-2.  In this Action Task you are being asked to Retell Me the Story.  In other words, I want you to revisit the story you created in Action Task 6-1 and with fresh eyes, retell it to me from your current physical and emotional state.  

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

As we talked about in Learning Lesson One and Action Task 6-1, retelling a story is when you take your storytelling to the next level.  It’s when you give yourself the opportunity to revisit or re-experience an image or photograph on a different day with fresh eyes.  Retelling of stories provides you with an opportunity to notice shifts and changes that naturally occur when we step away from something and come back to it with fresh eyes.   As we previously talked about, a change in a person’s mood can lead to a change in how they view and experience something. Therefore, revisiting an experience often leads to experiencing it differently.   This change itself can lead to changes in one’s reaction and overall feeling around what took place.  These are the kinds of shifts and changes that are instrumental to a client’s growth and healing.   Shifts and changes that can be more easily noticed and recognized when we retell a story.   

Review and Outcome:

So, with this in mind, I want you to go ahead and retell your story.  I want you to take another look at the photograph from Action Task 6-1 which I have copied below and retell the story you now see happening within the photograph.  Retell your story taking into consideration your current mood and overall feeling.  Write your story with this in mind.   

Once you are finished writing your new story, I want you to take note of any similarities or differences in your two stories.   Be sure to write these down along with any other observations you may have.  

Next Steps:

Once I have received your new story or the retelling of your original story, along with your list of similarities, differences, and observations, I will review it and forward any observations of my own, giving you the green light to move onto Learning Lesson Three of this Module.