Introduction:

Welcome back to the last Learning Lesson of Module Three.  Over the next few paragraphs, I will walk you through what a typical PhotoTherapy session might look like, how you can enhance the experience, and set your clients up for success.  And from there, you will be introduced to Module Four where things take on a more personal direction.

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

PhotoTherapy is an incredible visual tool that you now have available to you for use with your clients.  A visual tool that has so many aspects, levels, directions, and techniques for you to pick and choose from.  However, as was discussed in the last Learning Lesson, some of these techniques need to be entered into with awareness and caution.  Awareness for your clients needs, abilities, and limitations, and caution for how the techniques themselves work and with which concern(s) they are best suited for.  As we progress through the program the application of specific techniques will be addressed, however for the purpose of this Learning Lesson the specifics are not necessary.

How a Session Begins

A typical PhotoTherapy session will run anywhere from 45 – 60 minutes dependant upon the age of the individual and their attention span.  However, because my practice is visual based, I have found that most clients can easily manage a 60-minute session.

I generally greet my clients at the door after which point, they are instructed to choose an image from the assortment of photographs that I keep on my working table.  The image they have been asked to choose should relate to how they are feeling in that moment or in general, as this photograph will be the basis for which we begin the session.  Once the client has chosen their image and they are comfortably seated, I will then ask them to share the photograph and explain their choice.  This acts like a check-in and gives me a starting point from which to begin the session.  I have also found that by asking the client to choose their own image rather then me giving them one, they tend to put more thought and effort into the choosing itself. 

Following the client’s explanation of their choice, I usually run through a series of questions that will help me gather a bit more information and support the direction the session needs to take.  Questions like: 

What do you think the photograph is really about?

What do you notice or see in the photograph that supports how you are feeling?

Is there anything about the photograph you can identify with or relate to personally?

What if anything would you add to this photograph?

What if anything would you take away or remove from the photograph?

If you had to give the photograph a title what would you call it?

How does the photograph make you feel now?

The questions are simple and straightforward, but because they are directed at the client (notice the use of the word ‘you’ in each question) rather than in general, they tend to draw out a more personal response then was initially shared by the client.   These responses then become the focal point of the session as they will tell you what the client is focusing on in that moment which is where you will need to begin.  Each session will begin differently based upon the photograph the client chooses; however, it will always give you a solid starting point from which to begin.  In my experience when a client is forced to get personal with an image, they tend to get to the heart of the matter much quicker.    

From here you can determine your next course of action based upon their responses.  For example, whether to continue with single image use, multiple image use, self-portraits, family albums, image story telling, collage, or projected imagery.  Again, the direction you go or take after your client chooses their initial image and answers your set questions, will be based upon the clients needs in that moment.  Keep in mind though that it is possible for more than one PhotoTherapy technique to apply to any one concern.  Therefore, you will need to pay close attention to the client’s answers and their body language to know which technique would best suit their needs in that moment.  

Depending upon your method of therapy (client focused, solution focused, cognitive, behavioural, etc.) or how you choose to work with your clients, your approach to PhotoTherapy and its techniques may also be different than mine.  And that’s okay, just as long as you are gentle with the process, pay close attention to your client’s responses both physical and verbal, and introduce the PhotoTherapy technique(s) and any images or photographs you will be using, with your client in mind.   Most clients know the direction they need to take in order to overcome or heal, however they may not always be ready to go in that direction.  So, be sure to gauge your client’s responses before applying a technique or introducing an image.  

Review and Outcome:

This is what a typical session looks like for the most part.  A client comes in, is greeted, chooses an image, explains their choice, and answers some personalized questions.  The session then continues based upon the client’s individual needs in that moment.  From week to week, despite having a goal or focal concern, the sessions should always take place in the present.  In other words, be focused on what the client is experiencing in the moment as this will support the client’s ability to stay current and avoid approaching things from a position of the past and support which PhotoTherapy technique or image that you will choose to use.

Next Steps:

This concludes Module 3.  I’ll meet you in Module 4 where things get a little more personal!