Introduction:

Just like a photograph, the potential to learn about yourself and clients through movies and film is endless.  In fact, just by its very nature, movies and films present a multitude of opportunities for learning. 

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:    

Movies and films, as we previously talked about in Module Two, Learning Lesson Four, Technique #7, are a series of images or pictures that have been seamlessly woven together to create a message or a story.  That story or message is what serves as the therapeutic element in treatment, but it’s the scenes themselves that serve as the opportunity for growth.  The connection or connections made while watching a movie or film will provide you with valuable information in terms of where the client is at in his or her life, what they are most focused on and why, and whether or not they live by reality or fantasy.  These connections are what will lead you to the learning opportunities as they reveal so much about ourselves in terms of what we feel is good, missing, or not working well in our lives.  Learning opportunities, similar to those found in a photograph, in that they too bring about awareness and understanding for expectations and/or our need for them.  

The difference in learning opportunities between the two visual mediums, photographs, and film, may seem insignificant as both convey emotions, thoughts, ideas, memories, and messages, as well as express moods, tell stories, capture, and freeze moments in time, document changes in people and our world, and depict growth.   However, because movies and films take more time to tell the story and convey the messages, the opportunities for awareness, introspection, curiosity, and problem solving are that much greater.   A movie or a film tells a story from beginning to end, whereas a photograph only tells the story of the moment it was taken.  Similar to a puzzle, when you have all the pieces you are able to complete the image and identify the outcome.  Movies and films are like puzzles whereby they offer us more pieces to work with in support of figuring out what areas of our lives need the most attention and why.  Personal puzzles that when pieced together give us a clearer picture of what we have been focusing on rather then what we should be working on.   Again, just like images and photographs, movies and films help us identify our expectations.  Expectations that directly affect how we live our lives, the choices, and decisions we make, and the outcomes we experience as a result of them.  

Some people watch a movie or film once, whereas others will watch the same movie or film repeatedly.  Being able to identify the parts or scenes that you are most drawn to or moved by, within specific movies or films, can serve as the starting point for solving your personal puzzle.  Being able to identify which genre of movies or films a client does or doesn’t like can also provide you with valuable insight.  In addition to this, the fact that a movie or film can be based upon a true story or purely fictional, again opens the door to multiple benefits, uses and learning opportunities.  

Here’s an example of what I mean.   I have a dear friend who I have been friends with forever, and one that I always have a wonderful time with despite our differences in likes and dislikes.  We share the same values, importance of family, sense of humour and love for Home Sense.   However, our taste in attire and decorating are completely different, as is our parenting style, goals, and need for balance in our lives.   She’s always late for everything and I’m always a half hour too early.  She lives and thrives on a highly stressful life, and I don’t.  So, what is the reason for sharing all this with you?  Well because another thing we don’t share or have in common is the importance of card giving.   And while this sounds small and trivial, it had caused me to feel unimportant and less special for quite a few years.  Ten years to be exact until I finally felt compelled to say something.  It was on my 40th birthday and we were out having dinner together.  We were having an enjoyable time and the food was great.  We had a couple of drinks and lots of laughs.  And when the check came, she paid, and we left the restaurant.   And while I was appreciative of the meal and the night out, I once again felt unimportant and less special as the evening was coming to an end.  Why?  Because there was no card.  No tangible piece of thoughtfulness or effort that cards represented for me.   And when I said something to her, when I told her how the absence of a card made me feel, she just smiled and said “but Kel that’s your thing!  You’re the card giver.  They’re not important me.  I’ve never been all that interested in cards, giving, or receiving them.  I’d much rather take you out for a special dinner and spend some quality time together”.  And as soon as she said that I knew that she was right.  I was the card giver.  Cards were important to me not her.  I loved buying cards for people, but she didn’t.  That wasn’t her way of expressing her affections.  For her, making reservations and taking 3 hours out of her already busy day, was how she felt she was showing me how important and special a friend I was to her.  So. my expectation that she should also love buying cards, or be a card person, created an outcome for me that left me feeling unimportant and less special.  Had I realized earlier on, and not just with her, that not everyone has the same appreciation for cards as I do, then I would have saved myself so many unnecessary moments of feeling unimportant and less special.    

When we have expectations, we often experience disappointing outcomes.   And when we experience disappointing outcomes, we are often left feeling sorry for ourselves.   Now how did I know that the absence of cards was problematic for me, and not just with her?  Or where that even stemmed from?  Well, I realized it one evening while I was watching a movie.  There was a scene in the movie where this woman who had recently lost her mother was going through an old box of trinkets and letters, and she came across a card from her mom.  I immediately started crying as a flood of memories came rushing back.  My own mother had passed eight years before and she too was a card giver.  She wasn’t much of anything else, in fact she was not all that nice of a person, but boy could she write a heartfelt card.  And it was in those cards that I could feel her love despite her inability to say or show it.  In that moment of wet tears and wounded heart, I knew where that expectation came from.  I knew where my love of cards and giving cards came from, and why the absence of them left me feeling unimportant and less special.  Eight years may have gone but I was still mourning the loss of my mother’s love that came in the form of a card.  It took seeing a similar experience on film to trigger a memory that I had forgotten.  One that I had buried with my mom all those years ago.  A memory that came rushing back thanks to the scene in the movie and my visual processor, my brain that scrambled to locate a similar experience so that I could formulate a response.  And as it turned out, a response that I needed to experience in order to understand my expectation and need for a desired outcome.   

This same reasoning applies to outcomes that we look at with a sense of disappointment or regret.   These disappointments or regrets can have an affect on our choices and decision making.  So, there is always something to learn from a disappointment or regret as it can usually be traced back to an expectation.   It would be naïve to think of a client’s problem as being the effect of any one single cause, and it would be equally naïve to the think that those causes aren’t intertwined.  These are the incredible opportunities for learning that can come about just from viewing movies and film.  The learning opportunities are endless, and the awareness is transcending.  

Review and Outcome:

So, there you have it.  Be it a single image, photograph, scene in a film, billboard, magazine cover, snippet of a commercial or TV ad, whatever it is, if it’s viewable it’s teachable.  And if it’s teachable then it’s also learnable.  

Next Steps:  

I’ll meet you in the next Learning Lesson where we will talk about the use of projected imagery with clients.