Introduction:

Welcome to Learning Lesson Six.  This is one of my favourite Learning Lessons as it’s very direct and to the point.  

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

What concerns does PhotoTherapy work with?  Well, that’s simple … all of them! 

PhotoTherapy is one of the most adaptable and applicable therapies available to you today.  As previously discussed in Module Two, Learning Lesson Three, you learned that over the course of our lives we store and retain copious amounts of information and experiences in visual format for later use.  You also learned that our brains are mainly image processors and not word processors, and that a large part of our sensory cortex is devoted to vision because visuals are concrete and much more easily remembered.  And in addition to this you also learned in Module One, Learning Lesson Three that photographs are the one and only universal language that serves us all.  So, between the way our brains function primarily as image processors and visual memory banks, to also knowing that photographs bridge the gap between distance, language, and culture, this makes using PhotoTherapy and photographs with all clients the perfect tool for all concerns.

Remember what we just talked about in Learning Lesson Five regarding the language adage that says, “A picture is worth a thousand words”.  The adage that means a picture, or a single image, can convey more than one message, thought, feeling or idea all at the same time.  Well, if we were to take that adage and break it down even further it would also mean that any single image or photograph, we look at would then contain within it a message, thought, feeling or idea that was personal to us.  A message, thought, feeling or idea that we can personally connect to or with because it visually reminds us of an experience we’ve already had.  An experience that has been stored away in our visual memory banks for a time when we might need to refer to it to know how to respond to it.  

And because our brains, those visual processors of ours, have stored all our experiences in a visual memory bank for future use, it means that what I see, think, feel, and take away from any one image will be personal to me.  It also means that what you see, think, feel, or take away from the same image will be personal to you.  So, if one picture, one single image, can touch each one of us in varying ways, then it also stands to reason that that same image can also support us in varying ways.  And if that same image can support us in varying ways, that means that despite the nature of our concern, every single image or photograph is useful to all. 

Review and Outcome:

So now that you can see and understand how a single image can support different people with different concerns, you can also see and appreciate how beneficial PhotoTherapy will be to you, your practice, and your clients.  

Next Steps:

I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson Seven where we will talk about the valuable and useful information you can find within a photograph.