Introduction:

This is an exciting Learning Lesson, and one that will definitely remind you of why you made the decision to join F-STOP to Success in the first place.  With so many wonderful and amazing benefits, phototherapy is almost too good to be true.  But … it’s not and soon enough you too will be using phototherapy with your clients and wondering why you didn’t know about this incredible therapeutic process or program sooner! 

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

So, let’s begin with the most obvious of practical benefits shall we.  PhotoTherapy is one of the most adaptable and applicable therapies available to you today!  How do I know this?  Well as was previously discussed in Module Two, Learning Lesson Three, you learned that over the course of our lives we store and retain copious amounts of information and experiences in visual format for later use.  You learned that our brains are mainly image processors and not word processors, and that a large part of our sensory cortex is devoted to vision because visuals are concrete and much more easily remembered.  And you also learned in Module One, Learning Lesson Three that photographs are the one and only universal language that serves us all.  So, between the way our brains function primarily as image processors and visual memory banks, to also knowing that photographs bridge the gap between distance, language, and culture, I’d say that this in itself is proof positive for why using photographs in therapy with clients is a no brainer!

If all our brains are primarily image processors that have copious amounts of visual information stored in them to draw upon, doesn’t it then make sense that images, visuals, and photographs would be the best tool for uncovering or tapping into experiences that have had a negative (or positive) affect on us?  And if we can tap into those experiences without the need for language or conversation, wouldn’t it also make sense that images, visuals, and photographs could also be used to repair a negative affect or damage, as they too will be stored and retained for future use.  If we can draw upon our memory banks for the cause and affect, it stands to reason that we can also call upon them for the solution.

Review and Outcome:

So, now that you know that the brain finds it much easier to retain and remember visuals, and that because of this we have profuse amounts of visual information stored and at our disposal to use and draw upon with clients, I bet you’re excited to move forward and learn how adding phototherapy to your practice can benefit you! 

Next Steps:  

Well, I am super excited to tell you.  I’ll meet you in the next Learning Lesson.    