Introduction:

So now that you know how using phototherapy or photographs and imagery for your own concerns can benefit you personally, how then does this, or knowing this, help to benefit you professionally? 

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

Well let’s go for a little walk shall we!  Do you remember Module One, Learning Lesson 3 - Why You Need to Walk Your PhotoTherapy Talk - where you were reminded of your goals and how one of those goals in signing up for F-STOP to Success was to learn a new process that would better support your clients through their own healing journey?  And do you also remember learning that in order for you to do this most effectively, you yourself would need to be able to understand the process of phototherapy, use it, and appreciate it from a personal place?  That essentially you would need to walk your own phototherapy talk before being able to best support your clients! 

Well, the significance of that information I provided you with then has not changed one iota!  And just as I stated before, this is what will set the good therapists apart from the great ones.  Since you’ve signed up for this program, that tells me you want to be one of the great ones!  And the great therapists, which you are on your way to becoming, will have done the work that they are asking their clients to do.

It is my opinion, that students of a mental health or therapeutic discipline that are not required to participate in their own therapy is an act of professional irresponsibility and negligence.  There is definitely a risk of harm to one’s client’s when a mental health worker, social worker, counsellor, psychotherapist, psychologist, or art therapist has not experienced therapy from a client’s perspective.  In other words, they have not sat in the client’s chair before working with the client’s themselves.  

Imagine going to a personal trainer who doesn’t exercise and is overweight, or a dentist who has bad breath and yellow teeth, or a hairdresser whose hair is always greasy and unkept.  Not only are these individuals not setting a good example for their client’s, but they are also not setting a good example of themselves or their businesses.   Not having walked their own talk would make asking a client to brush regularly, exercise and eat better, or try certain shampoos completely ironic.  Wouldn’t it!  If I were one of their client’s, that would be my first and last visit.  Now imagine working with a mental health worker, social worker, counsellor, psychotherapist, psychologist, or art therapist who smelled of booze during your sessions or cried each time you spoke of a traumatic event or put down mothers every time you spoke of yours or shared their own personal experiences in the hope of soliciting advice.  Would you be able to respect the suggestions or support they were offering?  Would you be able to feel safe and assured that they had your best interest in mind as opposed to their own?  Would you be able to discuss your own alcoholism, abuse, or home life with someone who clearly was in need of their own personal support?  I wouldn’t!  

As a client I would want to feel that the professional mental health worker I am seeing has done their own work.  I want to know that they won’t be triggered by mine and are in a personal and professional position to best support my concerns and needs.   After all, as a client, I will need to feel safe and well supported.  

So, what better way to make sure that you are ready both personally and professionally to support your client’s needs using phototherapy?  Well, I’m no brain surgeon, but to me it would mean having used the therapeutic process of phototherapy for your own needs and concerns.  To get down and dirty with the things in your life that have been stopping you from reaching your own personal and professional goals.  In other words, what’s keeping you from moving past your own negative behaviours?  If you’re having trouble in your relationships, then they need to be addressed.  If you grew up in a dysfunctional home, then that needs to be addressed.  If you’re experiencing low self-esteem, self-confidence, or self-worth, then they need to be addressed.  I think you get the picture!  If you haven’t addressed your own concerns, then they will just keep coming up, but more importantly they will be a trigger for you during sessions with client’s who experiencing the same or similar concerns.   

You know how when someone is talking to you about something that’s happened to them or something they saw, and a similar experience or event that you experienced immediately comes to mind.  Well, that’s your brain, that visual processor we’ve been talking about, kicking into gear, and delving into that visual memory bank of yours and doing it’s darndest to draw upon a memory so that you can make a mental connection with the person you’re talking to.  And all of this happens in a split second, most of the time without warning.  The memory or the recall is right there for you to share back to the person you’re speaking with.   Well think about a client who is coming to you for help with their addiction to alcohol.  Picture them sitting in the chair in your office across from you, telling you their story and how badly they want a drink in that moment.  Picture them going on to tell you that they drink everyday, every night, and love the feeling of being intoxicated.  Picture them telling you that all their relationships are suffering because of it.   That they lost their job after showing up for work with alcohol on their breath.  Picture them telling you that prior to their session they had a drink as that was the only way they could get themselves to therapy.  Now, picture yourself, the mental health professional in the room, sitting across from them listening to their story knowing full well that you too snuck a drink from the flask you keep in your drawer before they arrived.  Do you think their story is going to trigger you?  If you don’t then think again!  I know this is an extreme example, however sadly it happens more often than you think.  And the example doesn’t have to be this extreme, it can be something as simple as a negative encounter with a family member or friend.  I mean we’ve all had those, and if we didn’t address them at the time, then chances are if someone were to bring them up, or bring up something similar, then we would be affected by it.  Maybe not in a way that would interrupt your ability to stay focused on your client’s needs, but then again who knows, perhaps it would.  

The point I am trying to emphasize and make here is that if we don’t take care of our own mental health concerns and needs, they will find their way into your office and one day you will be faced with them sitting across from you disguised as a client.   So, it’s best to deal with them now so that this doesn’t happen!  And what better way for you to do this then with phototherapy, the therapeutic process that you signed up to learn about and will eventually ask your clients to put their faith in with you.  This will be what sets you apart from the good therapists and the great ones!

Review and Outcome:

And so, in moving forward, it’s important for you to know that the relationship that you forge between yourself and your client could be an emotionally intimate and vulnerable one.  There is an inherent expectation that clients will, in time, disclose deeply personal thoughts and feelings to you, as well as allow you to bear witness to their past and current behaviours that may or may not be shame-based for them.  It is therefore your ethical responsibility as a mental health professional to create and maintain, as best you can, an environment that is both emotionally and physically safe for your clients so that they are able to share, process, and move past their most difficult experiences in a way that feels supportive, not re-traumatizing.  

Your position as a mental health worker or therapist is to model what an appropriate relationship looks like between yourself and your clients.  So, engaging in dual relationships, continuing to work with clients when there is a conflict of interest, blurring or crossing boundaries, or making the agenda for therapy yours and not the needs of your clients (by fostering co-dependency), is not an appropriate relationship!  It is essential that you do the work on yourself before you set out to do the work with anyone else.  

Next Steps:  

So now that you know and understand why adding PhotoTherapy to your practice can and will help you professionally, and you know that by using phototherapy for your own concerns and needs it will also serve you personally while making you a better mental health professional, maybe it’s time we move on to finding out why phototherapy is the perfect therapeutic modality for online use.  I’ll meet you in the next Learning Lesson. 