Introduction:

This is one of my favourite Learning Lesson because it’s the learning lesson where I get to share with you what can be learned from a photograph.  I’d like to say I have listed all the learning opportunities below, but the more I work with photographs the more I realize how much there really is to learn.  However, I am hopeful that after reading this Learning Lesson and completing the corresponding Action Task, that you too will be able to see the opportunities for learning that there are contained within the framework of a photograph.  So, let’s get started shall we!

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:    

As you have been learning in the previous Modules and Learning Lessons, images and photographs are one of the most incredible therapeutic tools available for use with clients today!  From the content to be found within them to their visual attraction or appeal, a photograph holds so many possibilities within the structure of its framework. 

When you look at a photograph, what do you see?  Most people see a visual representation of someone, something, or somewhere.  And they would be right, however a photograph is so much more than just its visual representation.   It’s only when we take the time to look a little closer, and with a little more thought and curiosity, that we can deeply appreciate all that can be found and learned within a photograph. 

So, what can be learned from an image or photograph?  Well, images and photographs convey many things, least of all as we previously talked about, emotions, thoughts, ideas, memories, and messages.  However, in addition to this they also express moods, tell stories, capture, and freeze moments in time, document changes in people and our world, and depict growth.   And if we were to look even closer, we would see that an image or photograph also has the ability to bring about awareness and introspection, trigger curiosity, answer or beg a question, cause, or create debate, make you wonder, and even cause and solve problems.   But what does this mean in terms of what we can actually learn from an image or photograph?  

Well, it is because of all that an image or photograph can do, that learning opportunities come about.  Learning opportunities like those that bring about an awareness and understanding for expectations and/or our need for them.  Expectations that directly affect how we live our lives, the choices, and decisions we make, and most importantly the outcomes we experience as a result of them.  Learning opportunities that reinforce our commitments and convictions simply by viewing an image or photograph that supports our values and beliefs.  Learning opportunities that bring about personal and professional growth because they challenge us to feel something.  Something we may not be comfortable feeling.  And it will be that uncomfortableness itself that brings about an unspoken truth that we can yet again learn from.  

Review and Outcome:

So, there you have it.  Any one single image, photograph, scene in a film, billboard, magazine cover, snippet of a commercial or TV ad, whatever it is, if it’s viewable it’s teachable.  And if it’s teachable then it’s also learnable.  However, if you’re still not sure what this means in terms of what can be learned from an image or photograph, then I encourage you to have a look at some of the photographs found in the link provided.  Photographs that are considered some of history’s most famous.  Photographs that depict events that shocked or moved the world.  Photographs that told a story and elicited a response.  Responses that were personal to the individual viewing them.  Responses that gave way to questions and answers, curiosity, causes and affects, and even self-examination.  However regardless of which, each one of these photographs presented someone somewhere with an opportunity to learn.   https://www.digitalphotomentor.com/20-most-famous-photographs/

Next Steps:  

Now it’s time for you to do some emotional viewing.  I’ll meet you in the next Action Task where you’ll put what you just learned into motion.  

Action Task 3-7:  Putting What You Learned into Visual Mapping Motion

(Needs Approval)

Introduction:

The purpose of this Action Task, in addition to supporting your visual learning, is to help you better understand how your own expectations play a part in affecting your desired outcomes.  When you can identify your own expectations, see how they are affecting your desired outcomes, and do your due diligence in figuring out where they come from, then you will be better equipped to support a client in identifying their own.  

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

In this Action Task I want you to create a Visual Map (VM) and to do this you will need to watch one of your favourite movies that has previously moved you to tears.  I want you to have a notebook and camera readily available to write down and photograph the exact scene that moved you to tears.   

I want you to print off a photocopy of that image and place it in the centre of a large (16 x 20 or larger) piece of white paper.  

Next, I want you to arrow out from the image or photograph writing down all the emotions that come to mind when you look at it.  This is similar to a mind map in that you will be writing down any thoughts, feelings, emotions, expressions, ideas, or memories that come to mind when you look at that movie scene.   I want you to continue visual mapping this image or photograph until you can’t visually map any more.  

Once you have reached the stage where there are no longer any thoughts, feelings, emotions, expressions, ideas, or memories coming to mind, I want you to forward your completed VM (Visual Mapping) to me for approval.   The reasons for this will become apparent once I send it back to you.  

Review and Outcome:

Again, I am looking for you to send me a Visual Mapping of a scene or image from a movie that has previously moved you to tears.  I am looking for a VM that contains your thoughts, feelings, emotions, expressions, ideas, and memories as a result of viewing that image.  I am looking for you to share with me the reasons that scene or image moved you to tears.  I am looking for you to VM anything and everything that comes to mind when you think of or view that scene or image.  

When you have exhausted your mind and there are no more thoughts, feelings, emotions, expressions, ideas, or memories to be had, then I want you to send your finished VM to me for approval.  

Next Steps:

Once I have given you my approval you will be free to move onto the Learning Lesson Eight.