Introduction:

As we go along, and as you will continue to learn, making PhotoTherapy a part of your personal and professional life makes perfect sense!  So far, we have identified the benefits of phototherapy on a personal and professional level, but we still haven’t identified the benefits of phototherapy on a practical level.  

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

So, what do I mean when I refer to phototherapy on a practical level? I mean how practical phototherapy is in terms of its use rather than its theory.  In other words, how practical phototherapy is for use with clients in office and online.  Because let’s face it, after the last 6 months no one knows if things will return to normal or if online work will be the new normal.  From a professional perspective, it’s much smarter to err on the side of online work becoming the new normal than it is to think that things will go back to the way they were.  And besides, why would you go backwards in a field that’s supposed to be all about moving forward?  

The Internet has had such a significant impact on so many areas of our lives already, that it only stands to reason that it will continue to do so.  From being the go-to for immediate sources of information to the easiest way to shop without ever having to leave the comfort of your own home.  The field of psychotherapy or therapies in general are also an area in which the influence of the internet is growing rapidly.  Long before COVID-19 hit, many therapists and mental health practitioners were already offering online services, but now since COVID-19 almost all of us have had to adapt our services for online work in one form or another.   This hasn’t been an easy adjustment or transition for some as the type of services they offer were never meant to be used or carried out over the internet.  However, those who are already skilled in the art of phototherapy are among the fortunate ones.

Phototherapy as we have discussed and learned thus far, is the therapeutic process of using photographs and imagery in treatment with clients.  Its all about looking at visuals to uncover the non-visuals.  In other words, using photographs and imagery as the go to source for immediate information.  And just like the internet, our brains, those visual processors we’ve been learning and talking about, can gather up stored information for use within seconds.  And if that weren’t enough, those photographs and images we use with clients can be reproduced within seconds so that both parties can be privy to and benefit from the visual at hand.   

When we source a topic on the internet, images come up as one of the main subheadings from which we can choose from.  Why is that?  Well because the internet people know that we as human beings share infographics three times more than any other type of content available.   Just look at the five fastest-growing social networks:  Facebook, Snapchat, Tik Tok, Instagram and Pinterest.  Not that these social networks are what we are aiming to become, but all of these are examples of visual markets that help prove my point.  The way people are consuming content or information today is radically changing.  Visual content is having a huge impact on the way we consume information.  Only recently did I read that 81% of people skim through the content they read online yet posts that include images have a 650% higher engagement rate than those that are text-only.   

Review and Outcome:  

So, from engagement to connection to message association, studies have proven that visuals are just that much more effective at helping people access, process, understand, and retain information.  And if this is true then it must also stand to reason that clients would benefit far more from a therapeutic process that uses visuals as its very foundation.   Couple this with the convenience and flexible nature of online services, and you not only have a winning process, but you’ll have a winning practice!  

Next Steps:

Now how’s that for providing you with concrete information that supports your decision to join F-STOP to Success!  Pretty amazing isn’t it.  Just think, not too long from now you will be looking back on your time here wondering why you didn’t add phototherapy to your skill set and practice sooner.   

So now that you’ve learned how perfect phototherapy is for use online, how about I teach you how phototherapy can improve your income once you get it there.  I’ll meet you in the next Learning Lesson.  