(PDF Provided)

Introduction:

Welcome to Learning Lesson Five, How PhotoTherapy Can Increase Your Income While Decreasing Your Hours.  This is a wonderful Learning Lesson in that it speaks to the financial heart of the program.   And it’s a lesson that simply requires a little reasoning and some simple math.

You’ve already learned about the personal, the professional, and the practical reasons for adding PhotoTherapy to your practice, but what about the financial reasons, or as I like to call them the bread-and-butter reasons.  The reasons that will make you so glad you decided to invest in yourself and your business, and have you making more money while working less hours.  Reasons that are simple and straightforward and will have you on the fast track to success in no time.  

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

Everyone’s heard the old English language adage that says, “A picture is worth a thousand words”.  An adage that means a picture, or a single image, can convey more than one message, thought, feeling or idea all at the same time.  We know this to be true because we all have our own visual lenses from which we view the world.  This means that what I see, think, feel, and take away from any one image will be different then what you do.  It also means that one picture, one single image, can touch multiple people, in varying ways, with varying concerns all at the same time.  And if one picture, one single image can touch that many people, in that many ways, with that many concerns, then your work as a mental health professional or therapist just got a whole lot easier and a heck of a lot more efficient.  

But what does this mean in terms of increasing your daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly income?  Well, it means that if one picture can convey multiple messages, thoughts, feelings, and ideas to multiple people at the same time, then multiple people at the same time, can view the same image while still being supported individually.  So, by adding PhotoTherapy to your skill set, and then implementing it into your practice, and taking that practice online, you are now able to provide multiple clients with the same concerns the same phototherapy activity from which to work from.  The way they respond to the activity will be individual to their own needs, as will the support that you provide them from there on in.  Sound confusing?  Well, it’s really quite simple when you look at the illustration below.  

Since PhotoTherapy is such an adaptable and versatile therapeutic process, it means that it can be used as we previously discussed in more than one way for more than one reason with more than one person.   Let’s break that down a little further shall we.   Let’s say you work with one client for one hour and charge $150.  All you stand to make is $150 in that hour.  However, if you have a tool that will allow you to work online, in group format, with 10+ clients an hour, you stand to increase your income significantly.  

Now I know you’re probably thinking the work you do isn’t about the money. And I would have to say that I agree. The work that I do with clients fulfills me in a way that money could never do. However, my goals, my aspirations, my dreams, the things in life that I want for myself, that I work so hard for, do come with a cost. And in my experience, far too many mental health professionals that work so hard to support others needs, often forget about their own or go without. So, if I can provide you with a therapeutic process that allows you to reach and support more clients in a day, while providing you with the income to support yourself and your goals and dreams, then I have to say, I feel good about that because you deserve it.

So let’s continue with the financial breakdown. Say you currently see 5 clients a day at $150/client/hour.  That means you’re making $750 per day or $3,750/week or $15,000/month.  But let’s face it, how many mental health professionals or therapists are making that kind of money a month?  And if you are well then that’s wonderful!  However, if you’re here and signed up in F-STOP to Success then I’m pretty confident you’re among those mental health professionals who are either experiencing burnout or just plain tired of having to work so many hours for so few dollars.  And if you are seeing 5 clients per day or 25 clients per week, then you’re carrying a full-case load which as you probably already know and feel, is a lot and mentally straining.  Did you know that burnout results from job stress?  That it stems from the numerous emotional hazards you face in your profession.  Burnout affects most counsellors, psychotherapists, and mental health workers at one point or another in their careers, and it’s not reserved for the seasoned or older therapists.  Burnout can strike those just starting out just as easily.  

So, what is the solution then for avoiding burnout that will still have you making 6K a year while only working the hours you want?  Well, when you have a tool like PhotoTherapy that can be used online for more than one concern with more than one person, you now have the ability to work with multiple people and multiple concerns at the same time.  And when you can do this, you automatically increase your hourly, weekly, monthly, and yearly income exponentially.  

Take a look at the image below that illustrates how using PhotoTherapy with 10 people rather than just 1, can turn that $150/hr into $1000/hr.  

Now take a closer look at the same image as it also illustrates how 1 photograph can be used to support those same 10 individuals.  And if you can support 10 people at the same time or within the same hour, you’ve just increased your hourly substantially.  

Scheduling your day into individual hourly sessions just doesn’t make sense anymore when you can be scheduling multiple sessions into that same hour.  This all sounds wonderful, but I’m sure you’re wondering what this mean for the individual client?  How can I provide the same quality of service and support for the individual client if I am now working in group format rather than one on one?  Well, I’ve been working online with my client’s in group format now for quite sometime, and in addition to finding it more efficient and less stressful for myself I have also found it to be more efficient and less stressful for my client’s.  How can this be?  Well, because I can now see 10 times the clients in a regular scheduled one-hour session it means I have been able to lower the client’s hourly rate, making it more affordable and less financially stressful for them, while still making over 6 times the amount per hour that I was.  And because I now have more time in my week, I am also able to offer my clients a 30-minute bi-weekly coaching call included in the group cost should they need additional individual support.  And if that wasn’t enough, I have also created a network support group where my clients can go and talk with each about their concerns and their progress.  Like AA meetings, my clients can now attend a weekly virtual support group where they can go to discuss the phototherapy activities, check in with each other, share how their doing, and most importantly know they’re not alone in their concerns.   From this you can see that by adding PhotoTherapy to your skill set and practice you will be supporting your own needs to work less and make more, and also the needs of your client to paying less but get more support.   

Take my practice for example.  I currently offer 3 one-hour group workshops per week, each of which is tailored to a specific area of concern (i.e., addictions, anxiety/fear, trauma/abuse).  Each one of these one-hour group workshops brings in $1000 (10 clients @ $100/hr) for a total of $3000 per week for 3 hrs of work.  In addition to this I also offer each client a 30-minute coaching call (specific to their own needs) once every two weeks, which amounts to 30 client coaching calls at 30 minutes per call for a total of 15hrs of additional work bi-weekly or 7.5 hrs weekly.  So far this brings my work week total to 10.5hrs.  In addition to this though I have also allotted 20 minutes per client (20 mins x 30 clients = 600 mins or 10 hrs) to my schedule for client documentation and administrative work.  This amounts to an additional 10hrs of work each week, bringing my work week total to a whopping 20.5hrs.  And as you can see this leaves me lots of additional time for myself, my family, and my friends while still making a 6K income!     

Review and Outcome:

So, what have we done by adding PhotoTherapy to our skill set and practice?  We have decreased our work hours immensely, increased our income tremendously, and saved oodles of time for ourselves, our families, and our friends.  And I saved the best for last, because that 20.5 hours I work in any given week is all scheduled between 10am and 5pm Monday to Friday, leaving all my evenings and weekends completely free!  Just think, this will be you in the not to distant future!

Next Steps: 

Next up you will learn about the endless concerns that PhotoTherapy works with.  I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson Six.