Introduction:

Welcome to Learning Lesson Nine where you will be learning about project imagery, how it works and when to use it with a client.  Projected imagery is a different technique altogether in that it combines the big screen affect with the single image impact.  It’s an incredible visual tool all on its own, and one that I have found best supports healing from trauma and abuse.  

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

Projected imagery is something I started using with my clients shortly after I went into private practice.  I noticed that using small images for big problems like trauma and abuse didn’t seem to carry the same supportive effect.  Clients were still having trouble talking about their trauma and addressing their abuser.   Two especially important aspects of healing in both cases.

So, I thought about the images themselves and wondered if perhaps I just wasn’t providing my clients with the visuals they needed or could connect with.  But switching up the images I used didn’t seem to make a difference.  Then when I thought about the enormity of the situations they had experienced and the large feelings and emotions that resulted from them, I wondered about image size.  And that was when I started experimenting with large format images, or what I now coin as ‘projecting imagery in therapy’.  

When an image is projected in large format the client is given the opportunity to revisit the experience without having to relive it.  In other words, they can return to the experience and work through it without having too actually be there.  And the size of the image itself provides the illusion that they are there, however removed enough to be able to see the experience from the outside, safely, and comfortably.  When a client can safely "step back into" an experience or trauma through projected imagery, you have just given them the opportunity to approach the same situation but with new eyes and new defences.  And being able to regain control of a situation and be a part of changing its effect, is the key to overcoming it.

Projected imagery has proven useful with many of my clients; however, I have found that it is most beneficial with those who have suffered abuse, lived through trauma, experienced loss, or are fighting an addiction.  Again, because each of these concerns are larger than life so to speak, they require the use of life size imagery.  

Project imagery also allows for manipulation in that an image can be projected life size onto paper or canvas.  This gives the client an additional opportunity to manipulate the situation and its outcome.  Being able to draw into the image, colour onto, or trace and break apart into pieces, provides clients with a newfound sense of control over how the experience ultimately affects them and essentially their lives. 

Review and Outcome:

Using projected imagery in therapy should be exercised with care.  Clients who have undergone sensitive experiences like trauma and abuse should be treated with sensitivity.  Using projected imagery with some clients maybe too much too soon.  It is important to get a feel for your client and their concerns prior to suggesting or using projected imagery as it could hinder the healing process just as well as it could benefit it.   Large format images are just as they sound, small images of specific moments in time that have been enlarged for better viewing and further inspection.   Specific moments in time that some may want to forget despite the affect they are having on their lives.  So, while projected imagery is an amazing technique particularly for trauma, abuse, loss and addictions, other techniques should be explored first. 

Next Steps: 

Now that you have learned the ins and outs of the nine PhotoTherapy Techniques, how about we explore what a typical PhotoTherapy session might look like.  I’ll meet you in the next Learning Lesson. 