Introduction:

So thus far in Module Three you learned about the brain and its incredibly innate ability to store visual information that you can draw upon and use later to benefit a client’s awareness, recovery, and personal growth.  But how does knowing this benefit you?  How does or will adding phototherapy to your practice benefit you personally?

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

Well first and foremost, you too have a brain which means you also have copious amounts of visual information stored and available to you for use when you need it.  Which also means that when you run into a personal barrier or an area in your life that needs more attention or sorting out, you too can draw upon your own visual memory bank or available photographs and images to help you better understand the concern(s) you’re dealing with and identify where it stems from.  

In addition to this, and as you previously learned in Module Two, Learning Lesson Three, photographs also have the ability to stimulate our memories and show us the areas of our lives that we are hyper-focused on or having trouble moving past, and because of this, it means that you too will be able to benefit from being able to visually see for yourself the amount of attention, or lack thereof, that you are giving to certain areas of your own life.  And again, when we can do this, it means we will be more apt to appreciate and change them.

Review and Outcome:

So, if using photographs and imagery can benefit your client’s and impact their well-being, then it only stands to reason that by applying phototherapy, or using photographs and imagery with your own concerns, will benefit you too!  And this my fellow mental health practitioners and professionals is when you can begin to see and better understand what that means for your clients and you professionally.

Next Steps:  

I just love how PhotoTherapy can play as instrumental a part in our own lives as it does in our client’s.  So, let’s keep going to find out how it can also play as instrumental a part in our professional lives.