Introduction:

Welcome to Module Four where It Starts with You!  This module as I explained at the end of Module Three is all about you.   After all, how are you supposed to instruct someone else through a visual journey if you yourself are approaching it blindly? 

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:  

Most training programs require future mental health professionals to complete a course of psychotherapy or therapy as part of their training.  The purpose or goal behind this is to provide them with both the opportunity to experience what it’s like to be the client as well as be in a position to work on their own.  When you have experienced what it’s like to be a client, then you as a therapist or mental health worker will better understand the nervousness that comes with opening up and talking to someone you don’t know about personal information.  Knowing what it feels like from a theoretical perspective is much different then knowing what it feels like from a personal perspective. 

One of the most important tools you have at your disposal as a therapist or mental health worker is your own self-awareness.  And with therapy you can improve upon this by becoming more familiar with your own triggers and hot spots.  When these triggers and hot spots are left unaddressed or treated, they can become problematic once you begin working with other peoples concerns.  What’s that saying, “you’re only as strong as your weakest link”.  This idiom also applies to your work as a mental health professional because you can only be as strong or as affective as your weakest state.   

Mental health professionals that get therapy are walking their talk.  By now you know that this is one of my favourite lines because I believe its applicable in all areas of our lives.   And like I previously pointed out in Module One, Learning Lesson Three, this will be what sets you apart from the good mental health professionals and the great ones.  

Review and Outcome: 

I can’t emphasize this enough.  Get yourself the support you need so that you can support others the way they need.  It’s as simple as that.  

Next Steps:

Now that you know what it’s important, lets figure out where it’s important.  I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson One’s Action Task.

Action Task 4-1A:  What Are My Own Concerns? 

(Needs Approval)

Introduction:

As previously outlined at the beginning of Module Four, you will have two weeks to complete Action Tasks 4-1A and 4-1B.  It’s important to take the time you need to identify the concerns that you feel are still prevalent or getting in the way of you living your best life and achieving your goals.  

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

I want you to take this time and get clear on the concerns that you know you haven’t addressed yet.  Get clear on how they are still interfering with or affecting your everyday life.  Get clear on what life would look like without them, and how addressing them will positively impact you both personally and professionally.  I want you to do this before you move onto the next Learning Lesson.  And, to make sure that you do, I am asking you to first submit to me a List of Concerns (LOC) that you want or know you need to address.  I am not asking you to do this so that you now become my client and I now become your therapist, but rather so that I know that you have spent real time thinking through and identifying real areas of concern that you feel addressing will help you both personally and professionally.  

So, over the next two weeks and through the next couple of Action Tasks, I want you to sit down with your thoughts and experiences and get real with them.  Get real and get clear.   I want you to identify and write down the areas of your life or concerns that you know will just keep coming up unless you address them.   I want you take this very seriously knowing that if you don’t address them then they could in fact be a hinderance in you becoming the best Photo Therapy Practitioner that you can be.  In knowing that they could be a trigger for you during sessions with your client’s who are experiencing the same or similar concerns.   I want you to address them knowing that if this happens it means you are breaching the code of ethics that mental health workers live by, and that’s “first do no harm”.  

The relationship that is forged between a client and his or her therapist or mental health professional is an emotionally intimate and vulnerable one.  There is an inherent expectation that the client will, in time, disclose deeply personal thoughts and feelings, as well as allow us to bear witness to past and current behaviours that may be quite shame-based for them.  It is therefore our ethical responsibility to create and maintain as best we can, an environment that is both emotionally and physically safe for clients, so they are able to share, process, and move past their most difficult experiences and memories in a way that feels supportive not re-traumatizing.  

Our position as mental health workers and therapists is to model what an appropriate relationship looks like between ourselves and a client.  Engaging in dual relationships, continuing to work with clients when there is a conflict of interest, blurring or crossing boundaries, or making the agenda for therapy ours and not the needs of our clients by fostering co-dependency, is not an appropriate relationship!  Therefore, it is essential that you do the work on yourself before you set out to do the work with anyone else.  

Review and Outcome:

So, over the next few days take some quiet time to get clear on your own needs and concerns, and what is getting in the way of you achieving your own goals.  Write down and make a list of what those needs, or concerns are and why you want to work on them.   When you feel you have identified all of them and are clear on what role they play in keeping you from being your best self, living your best life, and potentially becoming your best therapist or mental health worker, then send me your LOC and I will give you the green light for moving on to Action Task 1B.   Because it will be the work that you do on yourself that will ultimately take you from good to great! 

Next Steps:

I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson One, Action Task 4-1B.

Action Task 4-1B:  Identifying Your Own Personal Barriers and Obstacles

(PDF Provided)

In this Action Task, 4-1B, I want you to take Action Task 4-1A one step further and identify the Personal Barriers and Obstacles (PBO) that are causing your concerns and ultimately keeping you from living your best life and reaching your goals.  And the best way of identifying those barriers and obstacles is to look at the areas of your life that you are most unhappy with and the goals that you have not been able to achieve.   This is where your list from Action Task 4-1A will come into play.  Because the reason(s) for these concerns will amount to the barriers and obstacles that are in your way. 

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

Let’s say one of your goals is to lose weight, but you’ve been trying for over a year with little to no success.  Losing weight is not your barrier or obstacle.  What’s keeping you from achieving that goal is!  Or perhaps you have been wanting to leave your marriage but haven’t been able to do so.  Leaving your marriage isn’t the barrier or obstacle, but rather the reason or reasons you haven’t left yet are.  

So how do we determine what those PBO’s are?  Well because this is a visual program and you’re in the process of becoming a Photo Therapy Practitioner, we’re going to use an aspect of PhotoTherapy to work through this.  However, the way we are going to use PhotoTherapy to get to your PBO’s will be a little unusual in that we will be approaching them from a place of achievement rather then from a place of failure.

What I want you to do now in this Action Task is gather 10 images or photographs that represent the goals you have for yourself but thus far haven’t been able to achieve.  In other words, if you are wanting to lose weight, then find 10 photographs or images that support the weight you want to lose or the size you want to be.  If you want to end your marriage, then gather 10 photographs or images that support the life you want or think you will have once you are on your own.  Do this for every goal you have for yourself, finding images and photographs that support or represent those goals as well.

Once you have collected your images and photographs, group them together based on the goal, and tape those groupings onto their own large sheet of paper.  This means you will need a separate piece of paper for each of your goals and subsequent images and photographs.  You may want to move these images and photographs around, so it’s best to use a tape that can be easily removed.  

Next, I want you to identify 10 obstacles, or things that you think had to happen in order for each goal to be achieved.  For example, if you are wanting to lose weight and you have gathered 10 images or photographs that represent or show someone at the size you want to be, I want you to write down beside or above each one of those images or photographs, an obstacle that you think a person that size had to do or overcome in order to achieve that weight.  Then I want you to rate those things you’ve written down on a scale of 1-10 based upon what you perceive their difficulty to be.  One being the easiest and 10 being the hardest to overcome.   So, say one of the 10 things you’ve identified as something that had to be overcome in order for that person to achieve that weight and/or be that size was self-sabotage.  And say another was exercise.  What would you rate those two obstacles in terms of their difficulty to overcome? Each of your 10 obstacles will be assigned a level of difficulty.  Once again ranging from 1 to 10, with 10 being the most difficult and 1 being the easiest.  In other words, how hard would it be in your opinion to overcome self-sabotage versus exercise, etc.   Which one would be more difficult for you?  I want you to do this for each of the Photo Goal Sheets (PGS) you’ve created and remember this Action Task and entire Module is all about you, so everything you do here should be done with you in mind. 

Review and Outcome:

So, to summarize, I want you to follow the same instructions for each of the photographs in each of the groupings for each of the goals you have identified as those which you have not yet been able to achieve.   So essential you will have identified the goals you want to achieve but haven’t been able to, you will have collected 10 images or photographs that support each of your goals, you will have identified and assigned 1 obstacle to each of the 10 images or photographs that you believe would have to be overcome in order for that goal to be reached, and finally you will have rated those 10 obstacles you have outlined on each of the PGS’s based on your opinion of their level of difficulty.  

I have given you two weeks to complete Action Tasks 4-1A and 4-1B, however if you find you need more time, just let me know so that I know where you are at and can check in.  Once you have completed this Action Task in its entirety, let me know and I will give you the green light to move onto Action Task 4-1C.  

Next Step:

I will meet you in Learning Lesson Two Action Task 4-2.