Action Task 4-2:  Piecing Together Your Personal and Professional Puzzle

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval)

Introduction:

Welcome back!  At this point you should have in your possession several photo-based goal sheets that pertain to the specific goals you have outlined for yourself but have not yet been able to achieve.  In addition to this, you will have identified on each of the photo-based goal sheets, 10 obstacles (one per photo) that you feel would have to be overcome in order to achieve that specific goal.  Following this, you will have rated those 10 obstacles on each of the photo-based goal sheets, from 1 to 10, with 10 being the most difficult and 1 being the easiest.  So, you should be sitting with goals sheets that have 10 images or photographs on them, each of which has an assigned obstacle to overcome and a rating of difficulty.

So, what do you do now with all this information?  Well, this is where you get to have some fun.  Yes, I did say fun!  Because let’s face it, we are less likely to achieve our goals if we are not having fun doing so.   How likely are you to reach your goals when they feel like a chore?  Just look at how many people have tried to lose weight only to fail and put on more.  Why?  Because the getting their part wasn’t enjoyable!

Main Teaching Points and Supporting Points:

For this activity you will need to gather some of your previously completed Action Tasks.  So, that means you need to gather up your PVVMS (Personal Visual Vision and Mission Statement from Module 2 LL1 AT 2-1A), your BVVMS (Business Visual Vision and Mission Statement from Module 2 LL1 AT 2-1B), your VM (Visual Mapping from Module 3 LL7 AT 3-7), your LOC (list of concerns from Module 4 LL1 AT4-1A) and your PGS’s (photo goal sheets from Module 4 LL1 AT 4-1B).   In addition to this you are going to need a 24” x 30” canvas board, a pair of scissors, glue, and permanent markers or paints.  It’s best to do this activity on the floor where you can lay out all your completed Action Tasks or visual tools in front of you so that they are both easily accessible and visible.    

Next, I want you to take some time to look at and revisit everything in front of you.  It’s been a while since you completed some of those Action Task’s so they may have taken on a different feel for you.   Don’t be surprised if they have as this is quite normal as we get further a long in the program and more focused on you and your needs.  If there are things you notice on your PVVMS or BVVMS that are no longer relevant or no longer serve you in a positive way, then feel free to do excluded them.  Once you feel you are ready to move on, I want you to think about compiling all of the information that’s in front of you into one large visual image or personal and professional puzzle.  Think about what you want that to look like.  

Now I want you to think of the compiled image as being a template for your life and your business.  A visual template that you will stand behind or stick to regardless of what comes at you personally or professionally.   A visual template that if anyone were to look at it, they would be able to clearly see and understand the goals you are working on and the barriers and obstacles that you will have to overcome in order to achieve them.  Not that this visual template is for anyone other than you, but accountability is key to achievement.  Studies have shown that when we are held accountable for our actions, we tend to make better choices and achieve far more goals.   

I want you to have fun with this activity.  I want you to play around with the placement of your images and photographs, and where you want your goals to go in relation to your barriers and concerns.  Keeping in mind that barriers and concerns are not negative things, but rather positive improvements that will support you achieving your goals.   So, you need to enhance their presence, so they make the statement you need them to make.  Think about which images stand out the most for you and why.   Think about which images themselves speak the loudest to you and about the goals you have for yourself and your practice.  Think about their placement on your canvas board so that when they are pieced together, they will enhance the value or impact they have on you, not lessen it.   Think about how reaching these goals needs to be fun for you to want to achieve them.   Look at the photograph you printed out from the scene in the movie that brought you to tears.  Think about all the emotions, thoughts, feelings etc. that you wrote down that came up for you when you revisited that one specific scene.   Think about the impact that scene had on you and what an incredible accomplishment that is for a single image to be able to do!  Then think about how the same can be true for your canvas board.  How your completed canvas board can also be an image that makes an everlasting visual impact on you!  

When you’re happy with the placement of all your images and photographs and information from your previous Action Tasks, I want you to glue them down onto your canvas board.  Gluing them down makes them permanent, and you need for those goals and actions to have a permanent place in your vision and your mind.  

Next, I want you to think about how you can enhance your canvas board using colour to make it come alive.  Use your markers and paints to breath some life into those goals you have set for yourself.  Make them come alive in such a way that every time you look at them you feel compelled to move towards them.  Put some colour into those obstacles and barriers so they feel positive and welcoming rather than negative and unapproachable.   Make your canvas board something you’re visually and physically attracted to.  The more attractive it is the more attractive achieving what’s on it will be for you.  

Review and Outcome:

So, now that you have completed your personal and professional puzzle or Action Task compilation, I want you to send me a copy so that I too know and understand the personal and professional goals you have established for yourself moving forward.  

I want you to find a spot in your home or office where you can hang or place your visual compilation such that it will visually impact you every time you pass by or look at it.  This visual compilation should become your focus and your direction as you continue through the program and head into your new practice.   It is a visual compilation of many things, least of all the barriers and obstacles that use to keep you from achieving your goals but have now become your positive motivators.   

Next Steps:

Congratulations!  In getting clear with yourself, your obstacles, and your goals, you have successfully created a visual vision board that will serve you both personal and professionally.  A visual vision board that pieces together all parts of yourself that rely on the support of each other to be successful.  Well done!  

I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson Three where we will discuss the importance of continuing to use PhotoTherapy on the self.   