Action Task 7, Parts 1-8  

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval) 

Introduction:

The focus of this Action Task is to take all that you have learned and apply it to 8 specific concerns, and create a PhotoTherapy based activity that you feel will best support each one.   While there is just one Action Task to this Module, it does consist of 8 parts, all of which are related to concerns we have touched on or talked about throughout the course.   As I previously mentioned, I have given you three weeks to complete this Module due to the amount of work entailed in it.  

Each of the 8 parts to this Action Task, while the same in theory, will require their own time and thought to complete.  Because you are being asked to create a PhotoTherapy activity for 8 different concerns, you will need more time so that you can think about which technique you want to use and how you will use it to best support the concerns themselves with clients. 

Each of these 8 concerns are concerns that we have touched on at one time or another throughout the course, so you should be familiar with each one and have an idea of how to go about using PhotoTherapy to support them.  This Action Task is designed to put your creativity to the test to see what kind of a PhotoTherapy based activity you can come up with that will in fact support these specific concerns.   

The first concern that you will be creating a PhotoTherapy based activity for is Negative Self-Talk.  I have purposely put this concern ahead of all the others because I feel it is important to address first as it may quite possibly be something you encounter yourself while delving into the creative process.  Should you find yourself stuck or second guessing your ability to use PhotoTherapy and its techniques to create an activity for any one of the concerns, feel free to email me for additional support or to set up a one-on-one call to discuss your difficulties.  This is an important Module and the activities that you create are designed to test your skills and your abilities.   It is important to know this as you head into the creative process.   It’s also important to know that the more you use PhotoTherapy and its applicable techniques, the better at it you will become.  Just like any other therapeutic process, it takes time to get comfortable with the process itself and time to experience its benefits.    

So, before you begin writing, I want you to think about the concerns themselves as they have been presented to you with clients thus far.  Again, think about how you have used your pre-existing skills to support your clients through these concerns.   What did that support look like?  When you are clear on this, I want you to go ahead and start creating your PhotoTherapy based activities for the following concerns.   You are free to create them in any order, however it is highly recommended that you do address the concern of Negative Self-Talk first so that together we can address any personal concerns that may arise as a result.  This will also support your creative activities thereafter.

Creative a PhotoTherapy based activity for each of the following concerns:

7-1:Negative Self-Talk

7-2: Fear

7-3: Anxiety  

7-4:Depression

7-5:Grief and Loss

7-6:Trauma

7-7:Abuse

7-8:Addictions

Review and Outcome:

So once again, knowing the importance of images and photographs in therapy and the essential role they play in a client’s growth and mental health, I want you to use this information you have learned to create PhotoTherapy based activities for each of the 8 concerns above, that will further support the needs of your clients?

Going into this Action Task I want you to think about the concerns themselves before beginning to write.  Think about what these concerns look like and how they have presented themselves to you thus far.  I want you to also think about the work you have previously done with clients to support them with these concerns and how the use of PhotoTherapy and images and photographs in treatment can support their concerns and growth even further.  

When you are ready, go ahead and begin creating.  

Next Steps:

Once you have created your PhotoTherapy based activity for each of the above 8 concerns, I want you to send them to me for approval.   I will go over each activity and provide you with any feedback or suggestions, as necessary.  Once all your activities have been approved you will receive the green light to move onto Module 8.  This will be our final Module together and the completion of F-STOP to Success.

I’ll meet you in Module 8.