Introduction:

Welcome back!  So now that you have heard my story about how I overcame my own struggles, its time for us to delve into your story.  Because you’ve signed up for F-STOP to Success, I already know that you’ve been having trouble addressing certain client concerns, that you’re not meeting your financial goals, and that you’re experiencing burnout from having to see too many clients just to make ends meet.  These are very real areas of concern when it comes to operating your own practice.  And you are not alone in them.  There are far too many mental health professionals out there that are experiencing the same things.  And it’s not because they’re not good at what they do or that you’re not good at what you do, it’s simply because you have not yet learned what I know to be true.  And that is that using photographs, the one and only universal language that serves us all, is the golden ticket to changing all of this.  

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

To become the best Photo Therapy Practitioner that you can, it’s important to understand what PhotoTherapy is and have experienced its benefits firsthand.  This powerful therapeutic process that uses photographs to unlock repressed emotions and break down personal barriers is not a therapeutic tool that should be exclusive to your clients.  It is and should be a process that you make available to yourself as often as you need it.   When a process like PhotoTherapy can provide an understanding for the choices we make and an awareness for the impact those choices have on our lives, it just makes perfect sense to utilize it’s benefits as often as you can.

Using photographs in therapy presents an opportunity for your clients to look at their past experiences and see how they have shaped their present conditions.  The same holds true for you.  We all have a past that has shaped who we are, so whether it is a personal photograph or one that has been provided for, each will allow you and your clients to see how your memories and the emotions you attach to them can interfere with your reality.  

So, in addition to you learning the specific techniques of phototherapy and how to use photographs, film and projected imagery with your clients, you will also be learning about your own internal lens.  That’s the lens that you yourself view the world through.  And as I stated earlier, and will re-emphasize many times along the way, that as someone who works in mental health supporting other peoples concerns, you need to walk your talk!  You need to know what it means from a client’s perspective.  In other words, you need to know the ins and outs of this new process, of how and why phototherapy works, before using it with your clients.   And the only way to do that is to get real with it!  So, what does that mean?  It means being honest with yourself about the areas in your own life that need some support and using the phototherapy techniques you will be learning here to address them.  Because after all you want to be, and let’s face it as mental health professional we need to be, mentally strong and equally as comfortable with the processes we intend to use with our clients.  

One of your goals in signing up for F-STOP to Success was to learn a new process that will better support your clients through their own healing journey.  And for you to do that most effectively, you yourself need to be able to understand it, use it, and appreciate it from a personal place.  You need to walk your phototherapy talk!  In my opinion, this is what sets the good therapists apart from the great ones.  The great therapists, which you are on your way to becoming, have done the work that they are asking their clients to do.  And it will be this, along with the addition of phototherapy in your practice, that what will set you apart from the rest!  

Review and Outcome:

Adding phototherapy to your practice will not only improve your abilities as a mental health professional and the work that you do with client’s, but it is also going to improve the quality of your own life and let’s face it, isn’t that why you’re really here!  F-STOP to Success is going to support you in your journey to achieving your personal, practical, and financial goals.  It’s your golden ticket to being able to help more clients in a day without burning out, its your golden ticket to increasing your income, and its also your golden ticket to the freedom you want to be able to design how and what that looks like for you.  

So, once again I am extremely happy that you decided to invest in yourself and honoured that you chose F-STOP to Success to help you do that.  I know you are going to be so glad you did because when you are done with this 12-week program you will not only be proficient in the use, techniques, and application of phototherapy, but you will also be a more effective, skilled, and understanding therapist than you have ever been!  And again, this is what will bring you the success you’ve been striving for, the freedom from burning out, and the financial independence that you are so deserving of.  

Next Steps:  

So, let’s continue shall we!  I’ll meet you in the next lesson.