Introduction:  

Hi Everyone!  Welcome to F-STOP to Success for Mental Health Professionals.  I’m Kelly Gauthier, and I am so excited to be working with you!  First and foremost, though, I want to congratulate you on making the decision to invest in yourself!  Well done everyone!!!  I know it can be a bit overwhelming to take that leap of faith especially when there is money involved, but I can assure you that you will be so glad you did.  I will be with you every step of the way supporting you through this program so that you, your practice, and your bank account reap the benefits of all your hard work.  

What you’re going to cover and why it’s important:  

We have a lot of interesting content to cover together in this 12-week program and even with a hectic schedule I have broken the modules down into 3-4hr weekly bite size pieces.  The program is designed to be manageable even with a full-time practice, however I’m not going to lie, some of it is designed to take you out of your own comfort zone and examine the areas of your own life that you may have been avoiding or that are holding you back but trust me its all for the right reasons and its all good!  Because for you to become the best at what you do, you need to be the best at who you are first.  Especially for your clients.

And the great thing is you will not be alone in your efforts as you will have access to and support via email, my Facebook Group, it’s members, and designated coaching calls.  

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:  

So, in addition to learning the techniques of phototherapy and how to use photographs, film and projected imagery with clients, you will also be learning about your own internal lens (something we all have and use as our own way of taking in and viewing the world around us) and how that lens has been affected by the experiences you have had thus far.  In other words, you’ll visually learn how experiences either propel us forward or hold us back, and how experiences in general affect our decision making and reactions to things.  Its only in doing so that you can fully understand and appreciate how your client’s lenses work, and ultimately be able to support them in their making positive changes in how they view and react to their world.  Because its how we view our world that determines how we react to it.  

Review and Outcome:

So, for me, the most exciting part of all of this is that once you are done with F-STOP to Success, you’re not only going to have added an incredible new skill to your capabilities, but you’re also going to have added an incredible new skill to your abilities.  Because it’s one thing to be capable of something, like using phototherapy with clients, but it’s a whole different thing to be able to do so!  Personally, understanding how phototherapy changes the way we see, feel, notice, and experience things is your winning ticket to improving your mental health, your practice, and increasing your income!   

Next Steps: 

I can’t wait to get started!  I’ll meet you in the next section!  