Introduction:  

Welcome back!  So, so far, we have talked about phototherapy and what that is, the different aspects of phototherapy that you will be learning about in the program, and what that means for you personally and your practice.  Now it’s time for you to learn how to navigate F-STOP to Success so that you can dive in and get started on the Learning Lessons and their respective Action Tasks.

In order to do so you will first need to know how the program has been designed.  I have learned from experience that it’s often difficult to undertake new projects, or in this case a new program, without first knowing how to navigate it.  Considering this I have designed F-STOP to Success in such a way that it will be easy to navigate, follow, and carryout.   

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

The program itself is a 12-week program, which means you have 12 weeks in which to complete it.  However, having said this, if you find you are in need of more time, that perhaps you have hit a specific area of learning or a specific Action Task that has touched you personally, then by all means take the extra time that you need to work through it.  In fact, I encourage you to do so as it will help you become more proficient when supporting your clients who are experiencing similar concerns!  

As I have previously mentioned the program is designed to support your own concerns as much as it is the concerns of your clients.  So, because of this you are bound to have an emotional reaction to some or all of the Action Tasks, depending upon where you are in your own life.  The Action Tasks have all been designed to provoke thought and encourage personal growth, and I assure you that any reaction or reactions that you do have to the Action Tasks is completely normal and considered a good thing.  These reactions, and the work that you do around them, will definitely support your own growth personally and professionally, as well as help to alleviate any reactions you may encountered in the future around some your client’s concerns.  So, get ready to walk your phototherapy talk.  Yes, you will probably get tired of hearing me say this, but this is a crucial part of the program and of your becoming the best mental health provider that you can be for your clients!  

So, take your time and give the Learning Lessons and Action Tasks the attention both you and they deserve.  After all, you are responsible for your own progress as well as what you end up getting and taking away from the program.

The program is simple to navigate as it is self explanatory and uses well defined tabs and steps for proceeding through the program.

Next steps:  

Now that you know how to navigate the program it’s time to dive into the program and get started on your F-STOP to Success journey.  I’ll see you in the next Module!