Introduction:  

Welcome back!  This is the part where I get personal and let you know that I have not only walked in your shoes, but I have also worn out quite a few pairs along the way and have the scars to prove it.  

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points: 

It was about 20 years ago that I graduated from University.  I felt like I had the world by the tail.  I had this wonderful honors degree in Still Photography that I was so proud of and that I thought would lead me to achieving my dream of becoming this well-known photographer.  Little did I know that there were thousands of other graduates out there with the same dreams and goals.  So as time past, and money and jobs became an issue, I sadly realized that I would have to change my focus from becoming a well-known photographer to just being a photographer that someone wanted to hire. It was tough out there.  The competition was plentiful, and it became harder and harder to stand out from the rest and the best.  Doing portraits and weddings was fine, but it certainly wasn’t what I worked my ass off in school to become, nor was it making me rich or happy.  In fact, quite the opposite.  I often had to under sell myself just to get jobs which lead to me second guessing myself not only as a photographer, which was bad enough, but as a woman in business.  Things got so bad that I had to close my business because I just couldn’t afford the equipment I needed to keep up with the industry.  I ended up taking a job, get this, promoting other photographers.  I thought that this would be a good alternative because the money was better, and it would keep me in the photography business.  But I absolutely hated it!  Spending long days driving around promoting other photographers work took its tole on me both physically and mentally.  At the end of the day, I just felt like a huge disappointment and a failure!  And worst of all, I stopped taking pictures for myself which was the one thing that kept me going when times were tough.  Now I didn’t even have that!  There were many nights that I cried myself to sleep wondering if I would ever or could ever amount to more than this.

Thankfully, I have what I like to refer to as, mental reflux.  Where I can only stomach the negative thinking for so long before it starts leaving a bad taste in my mouth.  And when it’s at that point, I know things have gotten bad and that something has to change.  That’s when I remind myself to focus on the things I do love and not the things I don’t.  So, I did just that and of course my family, my friends, and my dog immediately came to mind, and, low and behold, so did my camera and taking pictures.  I found myself looking through old photos and revisiting all the important memories that I had cared enough about to document.  I came across photos of myself where I was happy, smiling, loving life, and I so wanted that back.  I wanted to feel like that again, like me again.  To feel worthy of being documented.

So, I decided to try my business again, but this time I decided to go at it from a different angle.  I thought more about how photography had helped me growing up, and how it had become my form of expression when I was at a loss for words. And it was in remembering this that I decided to open a photography camp for kids that would support their mental health. I thought if photography could work for me then it could surely work for other kids.  And low and behold CAMP CAMERA was born.  And it was a success.  I started off small and part-time, but eventually I was running a full day camp in Toronto offering photography programs that supported self-expression and mental well-being.  My energy and happiness levels were back up, and I was loving life again.     

However, sadly my struggles didn’t stop there.  Six months later I had a bad bike accident on my way to work that left me in a cast from shoulder to fingers on my right side, and hairline fractures in both my knees.  Recovery was slow and painful, and my bank account took a huge hit over the next 4 months while I was unable to work.  It happened right at the crucial starting point for camps and ended just as everyone was going back to school.  I had no income coming in and what savings I had was depleted.  So, I’m sure you can guess what happened next.  Yes, once again I had to close my business and take a job, I had no interest in just to make ends meet.  At this point I had pretty much resided myself that owning a successful photography business was just not in the cards for me.  I was beyond frustrated and feeling defeated and sorry for myself.  I’d shake my head and ask myself “how can this be happening to me again”.  But it was and what I needed to figure out now was how I could avoid it ever happening again!   

That’s when I decided to go back to school and further my education.  I still wanted to do something that involved photography, that much I knew.  But at this point I wasn’t even sure what that could be.  In my mind I had failed at owning a studio, a camp, and a business in general, so did I even want to attempt that again?   And if I did, I knew it would have to stand the test of time, because I did not want to go through this again!  

It then became about what I needed to take or add to my skills that would get me where I wanted to be – my own boss making my own hours making a 6-figure income.  I did my diligence and I spent hours surfing the net, looking for and at photography positions that supported mental health.  That’s when I came across Judy Weiser’s PhotoTherapy website and immediately knew what I wanted to do.  Bells went off everywhere!  Ding Ding Ding!  I wanted to be a Photo Therapy Practitioner, someone who uses photographs and imagery in treatment with clients, and I knew deep down that based on my history and education I would make an amazing one at that!  After all it was pretty much what I was already doing with the kids who attended my camp.  And it was definitely what I had done with myself.   But as I read on it became glaringly apparent that there was no school for phototherapy, however there were schools for art therapy.  Several as a matter of fact.  So, I figured why not get my formal training as an art therapist and then incorporate photography, or PhotoTherapy into my practice.  This would be a win win.  And as they say, the rest is history.  

Review and outcome:

I now operate a highly successful PhotoTherapy practice!  One where I get to set my own hours, see more clients online from home, and make the 6K income that I had always dreamt of!   And I did all this just by adding phototherapy to my practice and my own life.  

That’s my story and I can’t wait to be a part of your 6 Figure PhotoTherapy Formula story!    

Next Steps:  

So, let’s get started shall we!  I’ll meet you in the next section.