Introduction:  

Welcome back!  Now that you’ve had a chance to hear what the program is about, my own story and how I came to be a Photo Therapy Practitioner, and why it’s important for you to walk your own phototherapy talk, let’s get a little more detailed in terms of what we will be covering and learning in this program. 

As I outlined and explained in the previous Learning Lesson, phototherapy is the use of photographs, film, and projected imagery in therapy.  It is a process, like no other, in that it capitalizes on and uses the one universal language that serves us all … pictures.  In addition to this it provides us, as mental health professionals, with an opportunity to now address all concerns with all clients because it speaks “all languages”.   One could say, and I often do, that it’s a universal godsend.  PhotoTherapy will help you and your clients recognize the parts of yourself that are missing and the areas of your lives that are in need of the most attention.  And because photographs have a unique ability to speak symbolically, they will also contribute to the ease and success your clients experience through therapy. 

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

In this program we will be covering a great deal of information.   So far, we have already talked about What PhotoTherapy Is, but in addition to this we will also be discussing and implementing How PhotoTherapy Works, Why PhotoTherapy Works, the Who and What PhotoTherapy Works With, How to Use PhotoTherapy, How to Apply PhotoTherapy to Your Client’s Concerns, How to Carry Out PhotoTherapy Techniques and How-to Creative PhotoTherapy Activities.  So yes, it is a lot of information, but we will be covering all of this over a 12-week span so rest assured even if you are practicing or working full-time you will still be able to fit the weekly lessons and action tasks into your schedule.  I have broken them down into bite size pieces so that they are both doable and achievable.  Remember I know what its like to experience burnout and believe you me I do not want to add to the stress or time constraints you are already experiencing.  Having said this, the time and attention that you do dedicate to this program will have an impact on your learning and your abilities as a Photo Therapy Practitioner.  

Review and Outcome:

So, when you approach each Learning Lesson in each of the Modules be sure to set aside enough time for both the Learning Lesson itself and its respective Action Task.  This way you will be able to apply what you have learned to the respective Action Task while it is still fresh in your mind.  Having said this, you may find that dependant upon the nature of the Action Task itself (whether the task is geared for you personally or your clients), you may need to take a little extra time to absorb the activity and how it is affecting you.  In other words, each Action Task is designed to make you, or your client think, and as mental health professionals, we all know that with thinking comes feeling.  So, don’t be afraid to take your time to feel as well as think about the activity.  In fact, I strongly encourage it as this is all part of the process to you becoming the best version of yourself for both you and your client.  Learning the How’s, the Whys, the What’s, the How To’s, and implementing them, can often bring to the surface experiences or areas of concern that we ourselves have not yet dealt with.  This is the beauty of phototherapy and again what I refer to as walking your phototherapy talk!  So, welcome these opportunities as they will support you in becoming the best Photo Therapy Practitioner that you can be.   

Next Steps:  

Now it’s time to for you to learn how to navigate the program.  I’ll meet you in the next lesson.