Introduction:

Welcome back!  In this Learning Lesson I will be teaching you about what PhotoTherapy is through definition and use.  It’s important for you to be clear on this before you begin using it with clients.  So, this will be your introduction to the what, why and how of PhotoTherapy, with this Learning Lesson focusing on the what!

The Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

If you haven’t already googled PhotoTherapy, then I encourage you to do so now.  What you will notice is that the definitions or explanations that pop up do not fit the PhotoTherapy application that you are learning about here.   This can be quite confusing if you don’t know what you are looking for.  So, even though both types of Phototherapy treat physical and mental illness, the PhotoTherapy that you are learning about does so using photographs, rather then through exposure to light.  This other phototherapy or ‘light therapy’ is used to treat seasonal affective disorder (SAD) and specific skin conditions, whereas the PhotoTherapy that you are learning about treats all mental illnesses (SAD being just one those) as well as the physical conditions that accompany them.  In addition to this, the PhotoTherapy that you are learning about is visual and highly focused on treating the problem versus the symptoms.   And if you have ever suffered from depression or anxiety, then you probably know what I am talking about.  Physical symptoms like aches and pains, stomach problems, headaches, fatigue, and sleep issues can and often do arise as a result of the problem.     

So, what exactly is the definition of the PhotoTherapy that you are learning about?  Well, dependent upon whom you ask or talk to, there are varying definitions even though they all pretty much say the same thing.  My definition of PhotoTherapy goes something like this “PhotoTherapy is a powerful therapeutic process that uses photographs, film, and projected imagery in treatment with clients to help unlocking repressed emotions and breaking down personal barriers.  PhotoTherapy provides my clients with a visual understanding of the choices they have made or are making, which in turn helps to build an awareness for the impact that these choices have had or are having on their lives.”  Whereas Judy Weiser’s definition or explanation of PhotoTherapy refers to “the use of client’s personal photos and family albums as catalysts for therapeutic communication, giving form to feelings which otherwise might have been resistant to verbal investigations.”  But then there’s David Krauss who defines PhotoTherapy differently again, saying it is “the systematic application of photographic images and/or photographic process (often in combination with visual referent language and imaging) to create positive change in clients’ thoughts, feelings, and behaviours.”  So, as you can see from these 3 examples, there are varying definitions of what PhotoTherapy is (keeping in mind that there are many more definitions out there from other individuals using PhotoTherapy), however each one reflects the same underlying visual principles despite having been worded differently because of how it is being used.  

PhotoTherapy is just as it sounds.  The use of photographs (or in my case and practice, the use of photographs, film, and projected imagery) in therapy.  So, let’s take that one step further shall we.  What exactly does the use of photographs in therapy mean or look like.  This is a great question and one that is best understood through comparison.  Let’s use psychotherapy and art therapy as our comparative examples.  When you think of psychotherapy you think of a talk therapy, where the talk or conversation is the actual therapeutic process used to uncover and support a client’s concerns.  When you think of art therapy you think of an expressive therapy, one that uses the art making process as the catalyst for uncovering and supporting a client’s concerns.  Both have different approaches and applications, one being talk and one being art marking.  However, despite this both therapies seek to understand a client’s concern through personal expression.  As does PhotoTherapy.  The difference however is that PhotoTherapy uses photographs, or imagery, as the catalyst for helping a client identify, uncover, and understand their concerns.  Because photographs are visual representations of experiences or memories, they have this intrinsic ability to show us what we deem important enough to focus on and where and what we dedicate our thoughts to.   Essentially a photograph can help you realize, because of its ability to stimulate memory, the area, or areas of your life that you are hyper focused on, stuck in, or having trouble moving past.   And when you can visually see this for yourself, you are more apt to appreciate and thus change the amount of attention (or lack of) that you’re giving them. 

Over the course of our lives, we store and retain copious amounts of information and experiences for later use.  Our brains are mainly image processors not word processors.  In other words, a large part of our sensory cortex is devoted to vision because visuals are concrete and much more easily remembered.  Think back to a time when you were in grade school and had to learn new math equations.  Now think back to your first real crush or high school friends you chummed with.  More likely than not it took a great deal of effort for you at the time to remember those math equations, whereas your first real crush and high school friends were not something you had to learn or commit to memory.  And as such you could probably and effortlessly visualize those now even though its many years later.  Why is that?  Well, you can thank your brain for it’s amazing visual processor which enables you to easily remember life experiences.  You don’t have to work at memorizing these because your brain does it for you automatically.  

The symbols and visual representations that appear in photographs basically speak to the message the person who took them was trying to convey.  For instance, if I took a photograph of my grandkids playing in the yard, I’m essentially visually documenting the feeling they evoked in me as I watched them play.  However, if you were to look at that same photograph you may or may not be able to grasp a similar feeling or appreciation for what my grandkids mean to me.  Why is that?  Well perhaps you don’t have kids or grandkids, and thus you don’t have a frame of reference, or visual memories to draw from.   Or perhaps you do, but your experience with your grandkids is or was different than mine.  What’s important to realize here is that a photograph has the power to evoke feelings from whomever views it.  Yes, the feelings themselves may be different, but the ability is the same.  So, between the power that a photograph has to evoke feelings and stimulate memories, and our brains ability to visually document our experiences automatically, using PhotoTherapy with clients makes perfect sense.  

When I can hand a client, who is experiencing depression a photograph that lends itself to humour or happiness, and visually see a physical change in their facial expression or body language, regardless of how big or small, I know that they are holding a gateway to recovery.  

Review and Outcome:

So once again, PhotoTherapy is often defined by how one uses it.  You too may find that your reference or definition of PhotoTherapy evolves into something slightly different as well dependent upon how you end up or choose to use it with your clients.  Regardless, the application of PhotoTherapy begins and ends with the same visual foundation, and that’s photography.

Next Steps:  

Now that you know what PhotoTherapy is and isn’t, let’s move on to its Techniques and available sources.  Meet you in the next Lesson!