Introduction:

Welcome back!  This is one of my favourite Learning Lessons in F-STOP to Success as it will forever serve to remind me that I truly made the right decision in becoming a PhotoTherapy Specialist.  Yes, it’s true that I love photography, but this wasn’t the only reason I became a PhotoTherapy Specialist.  I became a PhotoTherapy Specialist because I wanted to be able to offer my clients one of the best therapeutic techniques ever created.  I had experienced phototherapy and its benefits growing up, so I knew the potential and power a photograph held, and I wanted to share this finding with others who were still struggling.  And as such, I will never get tired of reading or hearing about The History of PhotoTherapy or a photographs amazing potential to heal.

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

PhotoTherapy came to be as far back as the 1800’s when Dr. Hugh Diamond was documented for using photo-based therapy techniques (1856).  However even before this, Dr. Thomas Kirkbride was noted for using therapeutic photography (1844) and what he deemed “magic lantern” slides (https://youtu.be/J1fUSqH5op8) with his hospital patients. 

Over a 100 years later, Canadian Psychologist Judy Weiser published an article (1975) about the use of “PhotoTherapy Techniques”, and it was this article that brought fame to the name!  A couple of years later Psychology Today posted a brief notice asking others using photographs in treatment on themselves or with clients to contact the author.  After receiving over 200 responses, the PhotoTherapy Quarterly Newsletter came to be as a way for these individuals to communicate with each other.  Keep in mind though that despite having a newsletter that allowed for communication between these individuals, this all took place prior to the internet which meant there were still others out there using photographs and photo-based techniques that no one knew about.

Educational workshops on PhotoTherapy Techniques began to surface in Canada and the United States shortly, thereafter, being taught by such individuals as Krauss, Stewart, Zakem, Entin and others.  In 1984 Judy Weiser’s “6-day Intensive Training in PhotoTherapy Techniques” Workshop happened in Canada, with another to be taught 6 years later (1990) in Europe, in Leeuwarden, Netherlands.  PhotoTherapy was beginning to make its mark across the world.  

In 1979, the first ever International PhotoTherapy Symposium occurred in Illinois, attracting participants from across the world and presentations delivered by some of the earliest pioneers in the field (Krauss, Fryrear, Walker, Entin, Wolf, Gassan, Hogan, Weiser, and Zakem).  Many others who formed its very foundation and phototherapy’s literature base were also present.  While no one pioneer has stepped up to claim ‘phototherapy’ fame, they are all considered to be co-inventors who play an equally important role in the evolution of the practice of phototherapy.

Review and Outcome:

Photography and the use of photographs in therapy since then has grown exponentially in its use and importance in treatment.   There are thousands of articles to be read, hundreds of relatable books, and a ton of documented outcomes.   I have only scratched the surface in terms of the history and use, and I could go on forever, but this is where your part begins and my part ends.  

Next Steps:  

Curious?  I hope so.  I’ll meet you in Action Task 2-2.  

Action Task 2-2:  Researching

Digging for Photographic Gold:  Uncovering Visual Examples of Where Photographs Are Used to Help Support a Story Line, Cause or Affect – Compiling Your Findings Creates Belief

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval)

Introduction:

Welcome back!  In this Action Task (2-2) we will be switching things up just a little bit.  So instead of my giving you all the information, your task here is to create information.  No, not from your imagination, but from your own findings.  In other words, I would like you to do some digging and some research of your own to find examples of how photographs are used in movies, films, videos, and television ads to support a story, evoke a memory, convey a message, create change, or back a cause.  

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

You may be asking yourself why I have turned the tables from supplying you with information to asking you to compile it.  Well, research has also shown that by compiling your own findings you in turn create a stronger belief.  Therefore, when you have to do the digging to gain information on a subject you’re interested in or want to know more about, you are far more likely to remember it, retain it, and put it into motion then you would be if you had just heard or read it.  This takes us back to Module Two – Learning Lesson One:  Action Task 2-1A where you learned that as human beings, we retain 80% of what we see versus 20% of what we hear and 10% of what we read.  Therefore, the research you will be doing will not involve finding examples or proof from articles or books (written materials), but rather finding examples and proof from movies, films, videos, and television ads.   

So, by asking you to find examples of how photographs are used visually in support of a story, a memory, a cause, or to create change, I am in turn helping you create a greater awareness within yourself for the power photographs have beyond their initial framework.  In other words, when you pick up a photograph and look at it, what is it that you see?  Are you simply noticing what’s in front of you and within the photographic edges, or are you noticing more?  What about the story, the message, the cause, or the memory that lies within it?  If you are not currently noticing these aspects within a photograph, then you will have trouble noticing them in a movie, film, television ad or video.   This might make this Action Task a bit more difficult for you, however it will definitely strengthen your ability to take notice from here on in.  And this will serve you very well when you begin to implement photo therapy and therapeutic photography with 

your clients. 

Review and Outcome:

So, once again your Action Task here is to find examples of how photographs are used movies, films, videos, and television ads to support the story line, the message, the cause, or the memory they are trying to evoke or trigger.   To complete this Action Task, you will need to find 10 examples within each visual modality.  That means 10 examples of how photographs are used in movies, 10 examples of how photographs are used in films, 10 examples of how photographs are you in videos, and 10 examples of how photographs are used in television ads to support the story line, the message, the cause, or the memory they are trying to evoke.  

Once you have completed this Action Task, you will need to submit it to me for approval.  

Next Steps:   

Excited to get researching?  I hope so!  I’ll meet you in Learning Lesson Three.