(PDF Provided)

Introduction:  

When we talk about the Techniques of PhotoTherapy, we are not talking about PhotoTherapy by definition anymore, but rather by the specific applications of photographs and imagery that one might use with clients.  

Again, as like the definition, dependent upon how you choose to use PhotoTherapy or photographs with your clients, your techniques may vary in number and use.  The PhotoTherapy Techniques that I use and continue to use with my clients are as follows:

Photographs Taken by the Mental Health Professional

Photographs Taken by the Client

Self-Portraits

Photographs of the Client

Family Photographs or Albums

Projected Imagery

Movies, Films, TV Commercials, Documentaries and Video Games

Photographs from External Sources - Magazines, Books, Catalogues, Newspapers, Brochures, Billboards, Posters, Signs, Advertisements, and Social Media.

Photo Manipulation

Social Documentary

Black and White Photographs

Colour Photographs

PhotoTherapy techniques provide the opportunity for clients to visually connect with themselves and their experiences.   But what does that mean?  Well, when you provide a client with a photograph or image, regardless of its technique, you are giving the client a visual representation of an experience that they will be able to connect with in one way or another.  The connection itself may or may not be a personal one, it may or may not be a positive one, and it may or may not solicit a personal response, but a connection of some kind is always made just the same.  

How do I know this and how can I be so confident in saying so? Because when we look at photographs or images, it’s very much the same as when we listen to someone recount or share a personal experience or story.   Our brains automatically search for and recall a similar experience or an experience that connects with what the other person is talking about.  Have you ever been talking with someone and sharing a story, and they interrupt you or respond with “ya that happened to me too” or “that reminds me of this one time when…”?  Well, this is because our brains are not only activating the language processing part when we listen to someone talk, but also the other areas in the brain that we would use for memory and recall.  So, when someone is looking at a photograph or image, the same thing is taking place.  A memory, an experience, something we’ve read, heard, or previously talked about, is being recalled and brought to the forefront of our minds, making that split-second connection with the photograph or image at hand.  It’s incredible how our brains record and recall.     

So, now that you know how and why photographs and images solicit connections, let’s talk a little bit more about each of those specific techniques and why they are useful when working with clients.  

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points

Technique #1 – Photographs Taken by the Mental Health Professional

I often provide my clients with a selection of photographs that I myself have taken for use in our sessions together.   The photographs that I choose from are photographs from my own visual library that I have compiled specifically for use with clients.  They are a selection of photographs or images that I feel would work well or best with the concerns that I am most often faced with.  I generally present the client with a few options of photographs to choose from, and in doing so I am giving them the opportunity to still choose or select the photograph or image that they feel they want to work with or are connecting the most with in that given moment.   The images themselves may have been specifically selected by me, but the choice of which ones to work with are still in the hands and minds of the client.   

Selecting a specific photograph or image for a client is never the right course of action!  I cannot emphasize this enough.  Only the client can know what they are mentally experiencing in any given moment, and selecting an image for them can negatively impact, disrupt, affect, or change the course of their thoughts, reactions, and outcomes.  Therefore, the client must always be given the option to choose the photograph or image that they want to work with as it will have made that connection within them that we were talking about earlier.  A connection that gives us something to work with.  They may not even be aware of what that connection is, but by having chosen the photograph themselves, you know that a connection of some sort was made.  A connection that will then provide you with an opportunity for further exploration and/or discussion. 

If you decide to include Technique #1 in your practice of PhotoTherapy and compile your own photographs or images for use with clients, be sure to include a variety of genres, categories, interests, and processes.  You can never be too sure of which photograph or image, from which genre, category, interest, or process will ultimately make the connection needed for the client to heal.  

Technique #2 - Photographs Taken by the Client

Technique #2 is a powerful option to use with clients for several reasons.  Before we get into those reasons, I would like to begin by clarifying that this Technique does not include self-portraits as self-portraits are considered a Technique of their own.   I will explain this further when we get to Technique #3.  

So, what can be included then under Technique #2, Photographs Taken by the Client?  Well, pretty much anything except for self-portraits.  This could include nature photos, environmental photos, social documentary photos, event photos, family photos, abstract photos, collaged photos, digitally enhanced photos, cell phone photos, you name it, as long as the client has taken them then they are fit for use under Technique #2.  

What then are the reason this Technique is considered a powerful option?  Well, the main reason and most important reason is because they were taken by the client themselves.  The physical act of taking a photograph requires body movement, thought, interest, and a focus.  A lot of people don’t realize or think about what goes into or is involved in the act of taking a photograph.  When we think of a person taking a picture, we think of them holding a camera, focusing on a subject matter, and pushing the shutter button.   And while these steps are part of the process or act of taking a picture, they are not all the parts or pieces that come into play when someone takes a picture.   So, what is involved?  Well in addition to the 3 steps I have already outlined, there are at least 5 more steps that come into play before someone actually presses the shutter button.  

When a person sets out to take a photograph or photographs, they do so with the goal of capturing something of interest to them on film.  Now remember we are talking about photographs that the client has taken in this Technique, which means they could be photographs that the client has taken for personal pleasure or for other reasons.  Reasons like for work, for their business, for a family member or friend, or possibly to education someone on something.  Regardless of the reason, the mere act of having taken the photograph means that they were mentally and physically present while doing so.   That in itself is what makes using clients photographs so powerful.  There was thought and action that went into each photograph they took.  Even if the thought was “I hate taking pictures of birds”, it was still a thought, and a thought that means something to the client and in turn about them.   So, in this case we know the client hates taking pictures of birds, but what we don’t know is the why?  And it’s the why that will uncover aspects of the client that can and will be supportive and helpful in their treatment. 

I myself could never have been a forensic photographer because I don’t like photographing dead things.  I could never have been an accident photographer because I would be a mess getting to the accident and a mess at the accident because I don’t like seeing blood or open wounds.  And I could never have been a war photographer because I would be afraid of getting hurt or possibly worse.   So, what does this say about me?  Well, it says a lot about me in terms of what I do and don’t like to photograph, but in addition to this it also says a lot of other things about myself that I may or may not be aware of.  Perhaps it could be telling me that I have a fear of dying or that I witnessed something tragic in my past.  The point is there are reasons for my not wanting to photograph certain things and these reasons, like all reasons, stem from our nature, our experiences, and the interactions we’ve had with others.   This will also hold true for your clients.   What they choose and don’t choose to photograph will speak volumes about who they are, and it will be your job to support them in uncovering the why’s, or the reasons, so that they can get to the how’s.  In other words, so they can begin the healing process and understand how to move forward. 

Technique #3 – Self-Portraits

Technique #3 is unique among itself in that a self-portrait is not only a photograph a client has taken themselves, but it’s also a photograph that a client has taken of themselves.  This makes working with self-portraiture a wonderful option for self-exploration.  

Self-portraiture is an extremely beneficial technique to use with clients who are having difficulty with self-identify, self-worth, self-image, self-confidence, self-esteem, self-awareness, etc.  Adding to this, the physical aspect of taking the photograph as well as the client’s thought process during, are also additional factors to keep in mind when using self-portraits with clients.  

The internal standard to which we hold ourselves to often surfaces during the self-portrait process and upon viewing the finished product.  We tend to hold ourselves to a much higher standard than we do with others, and this in turn leads to our seeing ourselves differently.  This relates back to what I was talking about early on in Module 1 regarding our internal lens.  As previously mentioned, all the experiences we have had up to this point will affect how we view our world.  And because no two experiences are ever experienced the same, this means that how I see my world will be different from how you see your world.  Which in turn means that how I see myself will also be different from how you see me.  So, depending upon what concerns we are dealing with or experiences we have had, our internal lens itself can and will often be obstructed, damaged, faulty, or obscured.  This is what makes working with self-portraits such a great avenue for uncovering the areas or aspects of ourselves that are in need of the most attention.  When we can identify these areas or aspects, we can then work on identifying where they have come from.  It is only when we can identify where they have come from that we can work on changing how we view them and thus how they affect us.

Self-portraits, while a great avenue for self-expression and self-exploration, can also be a source of pain for some.  It’s important to assess your client’s needs and concerns prior to using self-portraiture as they may not be ready for that kind of self-exploration yet.  Trauma and abuse are two areas of concern that may require a different approach to begin with, however as the client becomes more comfortable working with relatable images, self-portraiture can be very effective in helping the client regain the control that was once taken from them.    

Self-portraiture for others though can and often is a source of fun.  Because the client is given creative license to set-up the photograph and themselves however, they would like, it allows for a different aspect of self-expression that can lend itself to imagination and fantasy.  In other words, the client can pretend to be someone they are not or perhaps pretend to be the someone they wish they were.  Either way this use of self-portraiture can bring about an awareness for self that up to this point has been missing. 

Which ever way the client chooses to use the technique of self-portraiture, you can be sure that it will provide valuable information from which to work with.  

Technique #4 – Photographs of the Client

You may be wondering how Technique #4 differs from Technique #3.  Well, the most obvious difference is that ‘photographs of the client’ are not photographs taken by the client.  In other words, Technique #4 will include any and all photographs that the client is in, however not those of which the client has taken.   So, these could include event photos, passport photos, license photos, business card photos, mug shot photos, newspaper photos, and social media photos.  As long as the photograph is of the client, but not taken by the client, it will fall under Technique #4.  You will notice however that I did not include family photographs in this technique as they contain or hold personal meaning for the client and thus require their own technique and use. 

Working with photographs of the client but not taken by the client can be beneficial and advantageous to treatment.  When the client is given the opportunity to explore themselves through someone else’s eyes, it can bring about an awareness for self that the client had not previously considered.  Some of these awareness’s of self may be positive and yet some may be negative.  Regardless, any newfound awareness for self is considered invaluable.  

When working with photographs of the client it is important to work with a variety so that the client is not solely focusing on one aspect or one interpretation of self, but rather many.  In doing so you will provide the client with the opportunity to look at themselves from varying points of view rather then just one perspective.  Providing a client with just one photograph would be like asking a client to paint with just one colour.  It’s important not to limit the outcome, but rather encourage it.   

Technique #5 – Family Albums and Photographs

The use of family photographs in treatment is considered a technique of its own.  Due to the personal nature and content of the images themselves, in my experience, care should be taken when applying them in treatment.  

A family photograph can be a vessel for many things, least of which is a client’s position, placement, or treatment within the family.  Any one of these aspects could trigger a client and cause them to withdraw, closedown, or blow up.  Not that these reactions aren’t a valuable part of the therapeutic process, but it’s important to determine when they might be most effective or more effective to the client, and beneficial to their growth and healing.   

Family albums and photographs are usually made or used as a means of recording time and/or its passing.  Because of this, they can also serve as a painful reminder for loss or a lack of growth.  While some of us are grateful for the photographs we have of those who have passed as they provide us with comfort, there are others who find family photographs anything but comforting.  Individuals who have experienced trauma or abuse at the hands of a family member may not be ready or capable of working with family photographs as they serve as a painful reminder of the experience or the event itself.  Using them could cause further trauma or regression.  

Family photographs contain an endless amount of information, all of which can bring about a necessary awareness and understanding for self.  Reviewing family albums and photographs can bring about questions related to connection, placement, closeness, emotional contact, personal roles, family bonds and family patterns.  I have often found that the conversations that stem from or come about as a result of working with family photographs can be instrumental in the client’s own growth and healing.  

Technique #6 – Projected Imagery

As a photographer I have a deep respect for the photographic process and its results.  As a Photo Therapy Practitioner, I have an even deeper respect for the images themselves and their ability to heal.  Over the years I have used photographs in therapy with my clients in a variety of different ways.   However, it wasn't until I started projecting them in large format that I was truly able to see their full potential.

When an image is projected in large format it gives the client the opportunity to revisit an experience without having to relive it.  In other words, they can return to the experience and work through it without having too actually be there.  The size of the image provides the illusion that they are there, however removed enough to be able to see the experience from the outside, safely, and comfortably.

When a client can safely "step back into" an experience or trauma without the fear of recurrence or repercussion, they now have the opportunity to approach the situation from a controlled standpoint with new eyes and new defences.  Being in control of a situation or feeling like you are can be the turning point in one’s healing.  

Projected imagery is therefore an extremely beneficial technique to use with individuals who have suffered trauma or abuse.  However great care needs to be taken when regarding its introduction and implementation.  

Technique #7 - Movies, Films, TV Commercials, Documentaries and Video Games

So just like individual photographs, movies-films-TV commercials-documentaries and videos games also hold visual potential for working with clients.  

When you think of a photograph you think of an individual image or picture.  When you think of a movie, film, commercial, documentary or video game, or as referred to here as Technique #7, you think of a series of images or pictures that have been seamlessly strung together to create a message or a story.  That story or message is what serves as the therapeutic element in treatment.  The connection or connections made from watching a movie, film, commercial, documentary or video game, will provide you with valuable information in terms of where the client is at in his or her life, what they are most focused on and why, and whether or not they live by reality or fantasy.  When you can determine these factors, the direction of treatment is more easily identified or defined.  

Some people watch a movie or film once, whereas others will watch the same movie or film repeatedly.  Knowing this is also beneficial as it can serve as a starting point in treatment.  Being able to identify which genre of movies or films a client does or doesn’t like can also provide you with valuable insight.  In addition to this, the fact that a movie or film can be based upon a true story or purely fictional, again opens the door to multiple benefits and uses.  

Commercials on the other hand are not something we necessarily pick and choose to watch as we would a movie or a film, but they are something we pick and choose to watch based upon their content and our interest.  So, using TV commercials or TV ads as a tool in treatment can be as beneficial or even more sometimes based upon the control, we choose to exercise over them.  

When I refer to video games, I do so knowing that they are as much a source of entertainment as they are a source of escape.  Escaping reality can have both positive and negative affects, however understanding which purpose a video game serves for your client can be helpful in their treatment.

Documentaries on the other hand are a non-fictional film source that are primarily used for the purpose of instruction, education, or maintaining an historical record or event.  Because they document reality, they are also essentially a wonderful resource for uncovering personal beliefs, values, and principles.  These are three aspects of one’s self that are often difficult to define as a result of upbringing and personal experience.   

All in all, each one of these visual formats contain valuable tools for working with clients.  

Technique #8 - Photographs from External Sources 

This is another unique Technique unto itself as it serves to include several additional image sources that can be used in treatment.  Technique #8 includes such images sources as magazines, books, catalogues, newspapers, brochures, billboards, posters, signs, advertisements, and social media.

Each of the above when connected with or to an image, have their own potential for providing personal awareness and understanding.  Again, what we choose to focus on, look at, and essentially visually absorb, can have a big impact on how authentic a life we are living.  If we are living our lives based on someone else’s focus, suggestives, goals, or directives, then who we really are tends to come into question.  And when we start questioning it means we are in pursuit of answers.  This is what makes using photographs from external sources such a great technique because it serves as a gateway for uncovering the areas of our lives that we have turned over or relinquished.  When we know which areas these are, that’s when the real work can begin.  

Technique #9 – Photo Manipulation

Now we come to Technique #9, Photo Manipulation.  This technique involves altering or transforming an image or photograph using various creative methods to achieve a different or desired outcome.  In other words, Photo Manipulation is a great technique to use in support of helping a client see how things can be different.  It’s one thing to talk with a client about how things in their life can be different, but when you can provide them with the opportunity to visually experience the change, they are more apt to believe it’s possible.  

Technique #10 – Social Documentary

This technique is one that I have recently added and begun using more often because of its ability to support ones understand of the world they live in.  When we think of Social Documentary photographs or Technique #10, we do so knowing that they can have a positive or negative impact dependent upon how we see our world and our own concerns.  

Social Documentary photographs provide a window into the lives of others as well as other places.  Stepping away or removing ourselves from our own situations and concerns is often a necessary step in order for change and healing to occur.  When we can remove ourselves or step away from our own situations and problems, we tend to see things differently or from a different perspective which we all know is a catalyst for change.  

Social Documentary photographs support this process by giving us a visual comparative.  A visual comparative that provides us with the opportunity to see what and where we place our focus on as well as what we deem important or unimportant.  This is where empathy, understanding, awareness and appreciation reside.  Often times when we see someone whose life appears worse than ours, we tend to see our life a little bit differently.  However, the opposite also holds true in that when we see someone whose life appears better than ours, we can often experience negative reactions (or what I deem positive reactions) that can then support or lead to the uncovering of deeply rooted concerns.  Deeply rooted concerns that need to be addressed in order for that change and healing mentioned early to occur. 

Technique #11 – Black and White Photographs

The use of Black and White Photographs can essentially fall into any one of the technique categories, however because of its ability to speak without colour and often times louder, I believe it should be a technique of its own.  When we think about the differences between black and white photographs and colour photographs, we often focus solely on the absence of colour.  But when we look further and dig deeper into the core of black and white photographs, we can find many reasons why they should be a technique of their own.  

For instance, the absence of colour in a photograph lends itself better to the true message that resides within.  Removing colour supports the shift that needs to occur in order to notice the compositional elements that contain those messages.  Don’t get me wrong, colours are wonderful (as you will read shortly), however they tend to create distraction and when using photographs to uncover repressed emotions and concerns, distractions can and often do slow the process.  The beauty of black and white photographs is that they lack those distractions, allowing us to see the details, shadows, shapes, textures, and patterns that we might not otherwise have seen had they been in colour.  Those details, shadows, shapes, textures, and patterns lend themselves to the therapeutic process in that they convey and create moods.  Moods that are often a reflection of what the client’s own moods are, or moods that the client is feeling in that precise moment.  And it is in that precise moment that the therapeutic process itself begins.  

In addition to this, black and white photographs provide the opportunity for the client to choose where colour is needed.  Colour that only the client will appreciate and understand for its placement and inclusion.  Making the choice to add colour speaks volumes and once again supports the therapeutic process. 

So, this once thought to be ‘technical limitation’ has certainly proven itself to be one of the most advantageous techniques of photography and phototherapy.   

Technique #12 – Colour Photographs

Technique #12, Colour Photographs is yet another technique that can also fall into each of the other technique categories (except for Black and White Photographs) in that it can be used in all forms and styles of photography.  

As is in Art Therapy, understanding the importance and symbolism of colours in photographs can and is an instrumental part of the therapeutic process.  Colour Photographs can convey meaning just as importantly as Black and White photographs and Social Documentary photographs however everyone brings their own experiences and culture to each photograph they view, so it’s important to gain further understanding into the client’s own reasoning for choose the colour photograph they did.  

When colour is used correctly in a photograph, it can help draw one’s attention to the subject at hand, creating a powerful visual tool for use in therapy.  Colour Photographs contain all the same elements that Black and White photographs do, except that Black and White photographs are comprised of highlights, shadows, and shades of grey whereas Colour photographs are comprised of colour hues.  These colour hues, whether on their own or comprised, are the elements that contain the valuable information that is useful to the therapeutic process. 

When using Colour Photographs in therapy though, one must also consider their benefits as well as their detriments in terms of how they support the individual client.  Dependent upon the concern at hand (i.e., anxiety, depression, stress, trauma, addictions) the use of colour photographs in treatment can either support or hinder the growth and healing of the client.  

Review and Outcome:

So now that we have covered all 9 Techniques of PhotoTherapy, you should have a better understanding for the role photographs, movies, films, documentaries, videos, and external visual sources can and do play in treatment.  

Each of the 9 Techniques serves a singular purpose as well as a combined purpose.  Determining which Technique or Techniques to use and which ones will serve your client(s) best will come with time, patience, and practice.  Be patient with the Techniques and their uses, as well as your client’s ability to ‘see’ their affects.  Remember, your client’s may have been looking at or focused on the same things for quite sometime, which means it will also take time to undo or change.  

Next Steps:  

I’m sure that was a lot of information to absorb but trust me once you get into the practical parts of the course you will see and understand all of this more clearly.  Meet you in the next Module!