Introduction:

Welcome back!  Are you as excited as I am?  I hope so as this Module is where you will begin to experience the benefits of phototherapy and F-STOP to Success.   

The Module itself consists solely of just two Action Tasks, both of which are designed to support you in getting clear on your reasons for adding phototherapy to your skills set.   You may be wondering why this is important or what my reasons are for having you complete these two Action Tasks, but I can assure you as you progress through the program this too will become clear.   

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:   

The first Action Task that you will be asked to complete and submit focuses primarily on the personal aspects or reasons for you having joined the program, while the second Action Task that you will be asked to complete and submit will focus on the practical side or business reasons for you having joined the program.  Both Action Tasks, as I have previously mentioned, are designed to support you in getting clear on why you have joined F-STOP to Success, what you hope to gain from the program both personally and professionally, and the outcome or goals you have for yourself and your business that you want to achieve.  It’s important for you to be clear on both aspects as they will both play an instrumental part in how successful you will be in achieving those goals.   

So, creating a vision and mission statements for both yourself and your business will help to align your personal and professional visions.   In my experience, you can’t truly begin to know what you want out of your business or profession life if you are not yet clear on what you want out of your personal life.  Your personal vision and mission statement will therefore help you identify your goals, your values, and your desires, and once you have determined these, you will then be better equipped to align your business life with your personal values.  After all, a big reason for you having joined this program was to alleviate the burnout you are currently experiencing because of your business, which in turn is directly affecting your personal life.        

This is why the first Action Task will ask you to create a Visual Vision and Mission Statement for yourself, while the second Action Task will ask you to create a Visual Vision and Mission Statement for your practice or business.  In each of the Action Tasks you will be provided with a thorough set of instructions, suggestive art and/or photographic materials you could use, as well as suggestions on how one might proceed with the activity.   I also know from experience that when presented with a visual activity such as this, it can sometimes be difficult or overwhelming to know where to begin, how to begin, and whether or not you are carrying out the activity as it should be carried out.  Therefore, I have made the instructions as clear and as simple as possible, not because I don’t think you would be capable of understanding them otherwise, but because understanding them fully is important to the outcome.  Having said that, you will be given the opportunity at various points in the program to change, add, fix, take away, or start fresh with this activity if need be.  I have purposely built this into the program because I know that as you progress through the Learning Lessons and other Action Tasks, you will find that your Vision and Mission Statements are evolving or perhaps changing, in which case you will appreciate the opportunity to rework them.

Review and Outcome:

So once again this Module consists of just two Action Tasks with no Learning Lessons.  You will be asked to complete the two Action Tasks and submit them before being able to move onto the next Learning Lesson in this Module. 

Next Steps:  

It’s time to get started on your first Action Task of the program.  I’ll meet you there!

Action Task 2-1A:  Creating a Personal Visual Vision and Mission Statement (PVVMS)

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval)

Introduction:

Welcome to your first Action Task in F-STOP to Success.  As previously outlined, both Action Tasks 2-1A and 2-1B will need to be completed and submitted to myself before you can move onto the next Learning Lesson.  The reason for this is so that I too have a copy of your original visual representations of the personal and professional goals you are setting for yourself.  This is important information for me to have and know as you begin the program, as well as important information for me to be able to reference as you go through the program.  As was mentioned previously, you may find that your goals and desired outcomes change or shift as you get further along in the program and having these concrete visual representations can and will help both you and I see where the shifts and changes are occurring and why.  Both of which will support your own personal growth as well as that of your business and serve as an invaluable visual tool to help motivate and inspire you towards your goals and the daily actions you will need to take in order to achieve them.

So why have I asked you to create these representations visually rather then verbally.  Well for one this is a visual program that has been designed to support your learning of how to use photographs, film, and projected imagery with clients.  But secondly because research has shown that the best way for anyone to learn something new is by experiencing it.  Therefore, beginning this program with an appreciation and understanding for how pictures and photographs convey information is setting you up for success!  

Studies have also shown that visualization can improve motivation and concentration, so as you navigate your way through this program and tackle the Action Tasks and creative activities, know that they have all been designed to support your own mental well-being as well as your clients.   In addition to this it’s also helpful to be aware of how we learn and retain information.  Did you know that studies have also shown that human beings retain 80% of what they see over the 20% of what they hear or 10% of what they read?  It’s a fact!  And this in itself is reason enough to not only appreciate the benefits of using pictures and photographs with clients, but also with ourselves and those we may be experiencing difficulties communicating with.

Another wonderful thing I love so much about using visuals, more specifically photographs, is that they convey a universal language.  So, despite where we live, our culture, or the language we speak, photographs can help bridge the gap in our ability to understand or comprehend what someone else is trying to say.  Such an amazing tool!

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

So, let’s get started!  

For Action Task 2-1A you are being asked to create a Personal Visual Vision and Mission Statement (PVVMS).  Remembering that your PVVMS is just about you personally, not your business.  Action Task 2-2A will provide you with the opportunity to create a Visual Vision and Mission Statement for your business (BVVMS).  So, for this activity I want you to strictly focus on you, your personal goals, who you want to be, do, and have in your personal life.  

Your PVVMS should express your vision for where you personally want to be or see yourself in the future, and reflect your values, goals, and purpose.  Your PVVMS should only contain images, pictures, and/or photographs that support these.  Examples of your personal values might be loyalty, honesty, open-mindedness, commitment, dependability, and reliability, while examples of goals could be things like improving your listening skills, improving your self-confidence and self-esteem, losing weight, standing up for yourself, creating more time in your life for you, your family, and friends, or perhaps to acquire your dream house or car.  Regardless of what it is, your values and your goals should be personal to you and only you.

So, with visual being the operative word here, I want you to get started on creating your PVVMS using only pictures and/or photographs.  No words!  You are free to use pictures or photographs from magazines, books, the internet, family albums, your own photographic works, or the works of others.  You may also draw pictures on your PVVMS if you cannot find existing ones that support your particular goals and desires, or if you need help emphasizing or elaborating on a particular picture or photograph you have already chosen.  The goal here is to create a PVVMS that speaks to you, your values, and your goals.  So, whatever it takes visually to make your PVVMS your own, if it doesn’t include words, is perfectly okay!  

Your PVVMS should be at least 16” x 20” in size, however larger is encouraged, and it should take up the entire page.  Remember this is a visual activity, one that you will be referencing often, so the more images you have and the bigger it is, the better.  Your PVVMS should also be large enough in size so that it can make that visual impact on you that it needs to.   Far too often we dream small for fear of being disappointed.  However, when we do this, we only end up having to repeat the process as the outcome doesn’t match our true desires.  So, think big right from the beginning!

Materials:  

Magazines, books, photographs, large sheet of paper, scissors, glue, tape, pencil crayons, markers, pastels, stickers, anything visual that you feel you would like to add to your PVVMS as long as it doesn’t contain words.

Process Instructions:  

Gather all your required materials or materials of choice, and find a quiet, comfortable, and spacious area to lay them out in.  You want to be able to spread out the visuals you have chosen to work with (magazines, books, pictures, and photographs) so that you can fully absorb their content and detail when choosing them.  

Next, cut, paste, tape or glue down your chosen images onto your paper (or Bristol board) and using pastels, markers, and/or pencil crayons, draw in additional images or visuals as needed to support the personal goals you have chosen for yourself, such that they positively impact your PVVMS you are making.  

Keep in mind that you are trying to make a concrete representation of your goals and aspirations that will positively impact you as you work your way through F-STOP to Success.  

You should have fun with this activity as you have creative license to fashion your future in whatever way you want it!

Action Task 2-1B:  Creating a Business Visual Vision and Mission Statement (BVVMS)

(PDF Provided and Needs Approval)

Introduction:

Welcome to your second Action Task in F-STOP to Success.  As previously outlined, both Action Tasks 2-1A and 2-1B need to be completed and submitted to myself before you can move onto the next Learning Lesson.  This is so I too have a copy of your PVVMS and BVVMS to refer to and reference as you go through the program should any changes or shifts occur.  Again, this is important information for me to have and know so that I can best support you as needed throughout the program.   

Main Teaching Points with Supporting Points:

Now that you have completed your PVVMS, you are ready to move onto creating you BVVMS following the same guidelines and instructions as before.  Remembering though that your PVVMS was just about you personally not your business, and in this Action Task (2-1B) you are being asked to focus solely on your business goals and desires not your personal ones.  In other words, you’re going to be focusing on creating a visual vision statement that visually describes what you want your business to be or look like, your purpose or position within it, where you want to take your business once you have it outlined, and how your business will serve you in the future.  Essentially, what does your idea of a successful business look like for you!   

As was in Action Task 2-1A, you are being asked to create your Business Visual Vision and Mission Statement (BVVMS) visually rather then verbally.  No words!  Again, you are free to use pictures or photographs from magazines, books, the internet, family albums, your own photographic works, or the works of others.  You may also draw pictures on your BVVMS if you cannot find existing ones that support your particular goals and desires, or if you need help emphasizing or elaborating on a particular picture or photograph you have already chosen.  

The goal here is to create a BVVMS that speaks to you as a business owner and should focus solely on your business values and goals.  Examples of your business values might be things like integrity, trustworthiness, accountability, boldness, honesty, fairness, and client experience, while examples of your business goals might be to increase your income, move to a larger space, purchase more equipment, work online, work from home, work fewer hours, etc. So, whatever it takes visually to make your BVVMS your own, if it doesn’t include words, is perfectly okay!  

And once again, your BVVMS should be at least 16” x 20” in size, however larger is encouraged, and it should take up the entire page.  Your BVVMS should be large enough in size so that it can make that visual impact on you that it needs to in order to feel real.   And remember, this is a visual activity and one that you will be referencing often, so the more images you have and the bigger it is, the better.  The fact that you signed up for this program proves you are interested in larger successes, so think big right from the beginning as it will impact the successes you are seeking to accomplish.

Materials:  

Magazines, books, photographs, paper, scissors, glue, tape, pencil crayons, markers, pastels, stickers, anything visual that you feel you would like to add to your BVVMS as long as it doesn’t contain words.

Process Instructions:  

Gather all your required materials or materials of choice, and find a quiet, comfortable, and spacious area to lay them out in.  You want to be able to spread out the visuals you have chosen to work with (magazines, books, pictures, and photographs) so that you can fully absorb their content and detail when choosing them.  

Next, cut, paste, tape or glue down your chosen images onto your paper (or Bristol board) and using pastels, markers, and/or pencil crayons, draw in additional images or visuals as needed to support the business goals you have chosen for yourself, such that they positively impact your BVVMS you are making.  

Keep in mind that you are trying to make a concrete representation of your goals and aspirations that will positively impact you as you work your way through F-STOP to Success.  

Again, you should have fun with this activity as you have creative license to fashion your business future in whatever way you want it!